When will experiences replace movie theaters?
=============================================

February 14, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/experiences)

* * * * *

When I was a kid, I remember my school putting on a production of *Peter
Pan*. For the dramatic flying scenes, they rigged a special harness that
would go under Pan’s costume and hoist him around the stage. But what I
remember most is sitting outside the theater, desperately wishing it was
me who got to fly. I knew I had a long life ahead of me, but when do
grownups get to fly as if by magic?

The world is weirdly disappointing that way. Billions of dollars are
spent making and watching people explore mysterious tunnels, chase down
alleys, and fly as if by magic, but there’s hardly a single opportunity
to actually do any of these things.

I know of two exceptions. In Boston, there is a company called [5
Wits](http://www.5-wits.com/). The experience is something like this:
you enter an unassuming rug shop and when the salesman asks if he can
help you, you tell him the secret pass code. He gets a funny look on his
face, locks the door and pulls down the blinds. He pulls back the rug to
reveal a television screen that briefs you on your secret mission.

Once briefed, he shows you a concealed door where you tiptoe down to an
underground passage way, only to find [one of those arrays of
laser-triggers](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/eb/Entrapment_Gin_posterior.jpg),
where you have to crawl underneath the lasers without setting them off.
This leads to a whole underground lair, where you have to solve various
puzzles to find the stolen plans, erase evidence of your intrusion, and
disarm a bomb. It’s enormous fun.

It’s hard not to think this will be the future of in-person
entertainment in the era of the Internet. Sure, movie companies are
loading up on gimmicks like 3D to force people into theaters, but it’s
hard to see that working in the long-term. No, we should embrace the
trend — let the Internet distribute every movie ever made and free up
these physical spaces to provide the kind of experience that you can
only provide in an actual physical space.

I feel (have always felt) the same way about museums. Go to a local
museum and look around — how much do you see that actually couldn’t be
provided by a website or a book? That’s why I was so excited to visit
[the City Museum](http://www.citymuseum.org/) in St. Louis.

In the dark days of St. Louis, when everyone with money had fled to the
suburbs, an artist named Bob Cassilly bought a large abandoned shoe
factory downtown. He and his friends begun using scraps and bargains to
turn the place into a giant sculpture park. As you walk in, you enter
the mouth of a giant whale, inside there are dozens of passage ways to
crawl through and climb on, each filled with its own surprises and
sculptures. Crawl down and you’re led through a network of caves which
spiral upward and upward until you find yourself atop a giant
eight-story slide. As you slide down, picking up speed, you literally
ride through a giant classical organ, playing music so loud it shakes
you to your bones. And that’s just the beginning.

The City Museum has been so successful, its led a renaissance of
downtown St. Louis. Part of the building has been turned into offices
and trendy lofts and the neighborhood now has some trendy restaurants
and a shuttle. I flew to St. Louis just to visit it and I don’t regret
it one bit.

But I am mystified by why there aren’t more places like these. There’s
definitely a universe where I work on building more. Instead we get
bland amusement parks, pretentious performances like Punchdrunk, and
dull museums and galleries. New York City worked itself into a tizzy
when artist Carsten Holler exhibited a slide a quarter of the size of
the one at the City Museum. Surely a city of that size can support a
place like this of its own. What am I missing?
