Perfectionism
=============

August 31, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectionism)

* * * * *

This may be hard for you to believe, but I’m something of a
perfectionist. I get a special kind of joy out of tweaking every last
detail until it’s just right, making sure each pixel is in its place.
Unfortunately, I’ve never really been able to indulge this desire on any
of my previous projects, either because my skills are too weak (no
matter how much time I spend on it, I’ll never be able to craft a page
like [John Gruber](http://daringfireball.net/) can) or because time is
too short.

At Reddit, for example, we were always rushing-rushing-rushing to get
more done. In [a recent post](http://paulgraham.com/die.html), Paul
Graham suggests startups can make you rich if you simply make sure to
email him once a week. At Reddit we had no such worries: Paul was sure
to email us weekly, sometimes even daily, usually asking why we hadn’t
added any new features to the site lately. (In fairness, it worked, I
suppose.)

When you get that question once a week, you get to try out many
different answers, including questioning the premise. At first I give
the usual low-level excuses: we weren’t feeling well this week, we had
to go to a meeting, Alexis was out of town. Then we started in on more
general principles: afraid of change, distracted by day-to-day fires,
dissatisfaction with the codebase. And once I sent him [*Slate*’s
suggestion that](http://www.slate.com/id/2141797) “the Eccentrics’ own
egotistical indolence has resulted in self-imposed limits to their
skills—at the very least it deprives the world of more of their unique
cultural prognostications.” (He was not amused.)

Paul eventually became convinced that we had written lots of good code
but wouldn’t release it because we were perfectionists. *Knock it off*,
he would tell us. *It’s more important to get it up than to get it
right.* Paul had become convinced that users love seeing new features,
it gave them the impression of an exciting vibrant site.

There is something to this, of course. But I have a contrary proposal:
users love perfectionism. Creating something brilliant is a process of
continual refinement: adding bits where they’re needed, chipping off
others that aren’t, and sanding everything smooth once it’s in place,
then polishing it until it gleams. Do one thing, release it, and don’t
stop releasing improvements until you do it really, really, well.

Adding features is part of this, of course, but not at all the whole
thing. You can’t create a great sculpture just by tossing on more and
more clay.

Meanwhile, even if users can’t immediately see all the subtle details
you’ve added, they begin to add up to a feeling of — if you’re talented
— delight. The software knows where you want to go and has already laid
out the trail. The path is worn smooth and shiny. Everything looks
beautiful along the way. And every day it gets a little bit better.

For my next startup, [Jottit](http://jottit.com/), that’s the plan.
