The Median Voter and the Mixed Voter
====================================

July 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/medianvoter)

* * * * *

Our minds work by making models of the world and using them to predict
how things will happen. These models are powerful because they’re so
deeply-ingrained we don’t even realize we’re using them. They just seem
like “common sense.” In politics, there are two major models for how
voters think, which I’ll call the median voter model and the mixed voter
model.

The median voter model says that politics lives on a line from left to
right. Voters are scattered across this line and vote for the politician
that’s closest to them on it. Politicians get elected by “positioning”
themselves closest to the most voters, which usually means in the
“center” of the line.

There are some complications, though. Because primary voters tend to be
“more extreme” (i.e. Democratic primary voters are all on the left,
Republicans on the right), politicians take a more extreme tack during
the primaries, before heading back to the center for the general. And
because they don’t want to seem like flip-floppers, they’re somewhat
constrained by the primary positions they take.

But, in general, this model is pretty widely-accepted in politics. So
widely that it’s not even thought of as a model — it’s implicitly
assumed by all the things political commentators say. Comments like
“He’s moving to the center to pick up votes,” “[X] couldn’t get elected
in that district, so how is someone more extreme going to make it?” only
make sense because we all have this model in our heads.

But, while I haven’t studied the question in detail, there doesn’t seem
to be much evidence for this model. Even intuitively, it doesn’t make
sense: does the average person really develop a location on a
one-dimensional issue spectrum and then figure out where various
politicians stand on that same spectrum? The notion seems almost
ridiculous.

**UPDATE:** Andrew Gelman has studied the question in detail, and
[concludes](http://www.themonkeycage.org/2009/11/politicians_have_a_lot_of_leew.html)
that the median voter theorem doesn’t seem to be true: “My research with
Jonathan Katz suggests that being a moderate is worth about 2% of the
vote in a congressional election: it ain’t nuthin’, but it certainly is
not a paramount concern for most representatives. … Incumbent
congressmembers almost always win reelection. And, when they don’t,
they’re often losing as part of a national swing (as in the 1994
Republican sweep or the 2006/2008 Democratic shift). And when an
incumbent does lose unexpectedly, it can be for something unrelated to
their votes (remember the “check kiting scandal” of 1992?).”

The mixed voter model, promoted by George Lakoff and most prominently
adopted by Howard Dean, says that voters aren’t rational, coherent
evaluators but a bundle of feelings, prejudices, and contradictions.
Politicians get elected by playing on the feelings voters already have
that would encourage a voter’s’ support. Thus, instead of moving to the
center to get more votes, Lakoff argued politicians should actually
become more extreme. Conservatives won votes by appealing to people’s
sense of order; liberals would have to respond by appealing to their
sense of empathy. Moving to the center by promoting a compromise
position that prevented rhetorical appeals of either type, was doomed.
This model was used to explain why radical conservative politicians kept
winning elections against moderate and centrist Democrats, when there
was no evidence of a conservative electorate.

This model makes much more sense to me, although again I haven’t seen
too much specific evidence for it. But it’s still pretty rare and seems
deeply-counterintuitive to most practitioners of politics. But whether
it’s right on the details or not, it’s clear that unless we evaluate and
question these models and think about them critically instead of just
assuming one is true, it’ll be hard to make much political progress.
