Simon Arrives
=============

July 26, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/simon)

* * * * *

Wednesday, June 22

I originally made a short-term reservation at Simmons Hall, both because
I had to get authorization for a longer-term stay and because I wasn’t
sure if I’d like it. I’ve already extended it once, but it expires
tomorrow, when my partner arrives (he also needs a room). I email the
house manager about staying. He says I should stop by. I go to his
office. He’s not there. I try back later, he’s talking to someone. And
so it goes throughout the day until he leaves. Uh oh.

I email him. He gives me a firm appointment in the morning. He can
extend my room through the end of the summer. ‘Thanks,’ I say. ‘Alright
then?’ ‘Actually, I have a friend and I was sort of wondering if he
could stay here too…’ ‘Oh, hmm, well, I need to keep a certain number of
rooms reserved just in case anything goes wrong, you know. I think we’re
pretty much out.’ ‘But what about that room next door to me? Nobody
seems to be living there.’ ‘That’s a double, not a single.’ ‘Oh.’

‘Actually, how about this?’ he says. ‘I’ll let you move into that room
and you can split it with your friend. How does that sound?’ This
Solomonic compromise is better than sleeping on the street or something,
so I agree. He marks me down in his book and gets me the key from the
desk. I move all my stuff over to the new room, which is like three
times as big as my old room, and nicely laid out too. I return the key
to the old room (stupidly, I guess) but I keep the door propped open so
we can use it if we need some alone-time. (Which indeed I do until my
partner gets us all locked out from it forever the first time he uses
it. Afterwards, I switch to using the time machine.)

At around 7:30pm there comes a knock at the door — my first here. I open
it and there’s a strange man I don’t recognize with a suitcase. ‘You
must be Aaron,’ he says. ‘Hi,’ I say. ‘I’ve got some good news and some
bad news. The good news is I cut our housing costs in half.’ ‘Wow, how’d
you do that?’ he asks. ‘Well, the bad news is it’s because we’re sharing
one room,’ I say and open the door onto our double. ‘Oh,’ he says, a
little scared.

Despite this humor routine, I’m a little scared too. Watching this
strange person move into my room is more than a little odd. I’ve always
been afraid of sharing space with other people. I almost thought of
dropping out of college if I had to share a room. At least this is only
for the summer. But it still seems odd. What was I thinking when I chose
to spend the summer with a random person based on little more than an
email and a flicker of name recognition. I didn’t even check references,
despite knowing one of the references. Why was I so stupid? I make a
note to check with that reference (which I never do).

Despite all this, it works amazingly well. Simon likes asking questions
and I like explaining things. We both enjoy our privacy and end up on
roughly similar schedules. Simon is a good, if not great programmer and
very open to being convinced he’s doing things wrong. In fact, Simon is
very open to anything. So open, in fact, that his openness is
practically the only frustrating bit about him. I can say the meanest
things to his face and he’ll just laugh and agree.

Our first big debate is about planning. Simon wonders why we aren’t
doing more planning. Shouldn’t we do use cases and draw up screenshots
and make a list of features and pick milestones and build a mockup
first? ‘Nah,’ I say. ‘Let’s just build it.’ This goes against what Simon
has been taught. ‘Planning,’ I say, ‘makes sense when you’re solving a
predefined problem or working for somebody who is defining the problem
for you. But it doesn’t make sense when you’re hacking. When you’re
hacking, as Paul Graham likes to note, you’re actually figuring out what
the problem is, exploring the problem space. It’s through writing the
code that you figure out what the code should do. You can’t plan that.’
Simon eventually comes to agree, although it takes him a while to get
rid of his instincts.

Even afterwards, he is still tempted to overbuild things. We needed a
permissions system, for example, and Simon build a super-advanced,
completely generalized database model for one so complicated that it
took up several pages of code. I spent a week trying to fix it up and
implement it before finally giving up, saying it was just too
complicated for me to wrap my head around. But he’s working on it.

I, meanwhile, have been struggling with my own demons — mainly
procrastination. Programming is an odd task in that it requires so much
mental discipline that your mind is often afraid of doing it. Worse
still is the fact that it happens at a computer, usually one with an
Internet connection, so there’s hardly any visible difference between
actually doing your work and running off to check your email or read the
news. It’s incredibly frustrating to snap out of a bit of newsreading
and realize you just wasted a couple of hours.

To combat this problem, I brought back an old application I wrote:
minuteminder. minuteminder unobtrusively pops up in the corner of your
screen every five minutes. When you get a second you can click on it and
tell it what you’re doing and it’ll log that with the current time and
go back and hide. The idea is that the combination of telling the
computer you’re really surfing the Web and seeing that you’ve been doing
so for the past 20 minutes will jolt you into waking up and heading back
to something more productive. It’s not a perfect solution, but I think
it definitely helps a lot. (A todo outline has been another productivity
lifesaver.)

Just having another person around is really nice, though.
