Welcome, watchdog.net
=====================

April 14, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/watchdog)

* * * * *

As you’ve probably noticed, it’s political insanity season in the US. I
can hardly go outside these days without running into someone
complaining about the latest piece of campaign gossip. I’ve mostly tried
to keep it off this blog, but it’s hard to not get swept up in the
fever. As someone who wants to make a difference in the world, I’ve long
wondered whether there was an effective way for a programmer to get
involved in politics, but I’ve never been able to quite figure it out.

Well, recent events and Larry Lessig got me thinking about it again and
I’ve spent the past few months working with and talking to some amazing
people about the problem. I’ve learned a lot and must have gone through
a dozen different project ideas, but I finally think I’ve found
something. It’s not so much a finished solution as a direction, where I
hope to figure more of it along the way.

So the site is called watchdog.net and the plan has three parts. First,
pull in data sources from all over — district demographics, votes,
lobbying records, campaign finance reports, etc. — and let people
explore them in one elegant, unified interface. I want this to be one of
the most powerful, compelling interfaces for exploring a large data set
out there.

But just giving people information isn’t enough; unless you give them an
opportunity to do something about it, it will just make them more
apathetic. So the second part of the site is building tools to let
people take action: write or call your representative, send a note to
local papers, post a story about something interesting you’ve found,
generate a scorecard for the next election.

And tying these two pieces together will be a collaborative database of
political causes. So on the page about global warming, you’ll be able to
learn more about the problem and proposed solutions, research the donors
and votes on the issue, and see or start a letter-writing campaign.

All of it, of course, is free software and free data. And it’s all got a
dozen different APIs to make it easy for others to build on what we’ve
done in their own work. The goal is to be a hub, connecting citizens,
activists, organizations, politicians, programmers, and everybody else
who’s interested in politics.

The hope is to make it as interesting and easy as possible to pull
people into politics. It’s an ambitious goal with many pieces and
possibilities, but with all the excitement right now we want to get
something up as fast as possible. So we’ll be developing live on
watchdog.net, releasing pieces as soon as we finish them. Our first goal
is to put up data about every representative and a way to write them.

I’ve managed to find an amazing group of people willing to help out with
building it so far. And the [Sunlight
Network](http://www.sunlightnetwork.com/) has encouraged me and
graciously agreed to fund it. But we still need many more hands,
especially programmers. If you’re interested in working on it, whether
as a volunteer or for pay, please send me an email —
[me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) — telling me what you’d like to
help with.

We only officially started work yesterday, so there’s not much up yet,
but hopefully it’ll give you a sense of where we’re going:

-   [Visit watchdog.net](http://watchdog.net/)

