Was Rachel Carson a Mass Murderer?
==================================

September 21, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rachelcarson)

* * * * *

A new issue of one of my favorite magazines, *Extra!* is hitting the
streets, with a blurb for my article inside on the cover. When I decided
to get into political journalism, *Extra!* was the first magazine I
turned to. Every other month they issue a brilliant magazine full of
articles which collect and dissect the standard media narratives on a
particular issue and then lay out the real story for you. It’s
invaluable. I think of their work as a good digest of the news: you get
the same misinformation you’d get everywhere else but you also get how
and why it’s misinformation.

For my first piece, I decided to take on the noise machine that’s been
loudly proclaiming in news outlets across the land that the
environmentalist movement, headed by Rachel Carson, is responsible for
the deaths of millions of African babies. Why? Because they discouraged
the use of the noxious pesticide DDT, which was previously used for
controlling the spread of malaria.

For the article, I dug into the science, interviewed the man behind the
misinformation campaign (Roger Bate, a character straight out of *Thank
You For Smoking*), and corrected claims from right-wing think tanks (no,
Rachel Carson did not kill all those babies) and from blogs (no, the
whole misinformation campaign is not funded by the tobacco companies).

You can read the full article [on *Extra!*’s
website](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=3186) or I’ve put up [a
version linking to all my
sources](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/rachelcarson).

An interesting footnote: As I noted above, Roger Bate insisted he had
not been funded by the tobacco companies, as many have claimed. Instead,
he said, their main original funder was the [May and Stanley Smith
Charitable Trust](http://www.adminitrustllc.com/foundations/mssct.htm).
The trust, a \$264 million California foundation started by a mining
magnate, has the mission of “provid[ing] grants to organizations that
serve the needs of children, the elderly, the disabled, and the
disadvantaged.” However, it has also been a major contributor to the
libertarian Cato Institute and George Mason University. Bate says that
its trustee, Luther Avery, didn’t “agree entirely with everything I was
suggesting” but at least thought “the debate was worthy of being
exposed.”

In 2001, Luther Avery passed away, leaving his \$400,000 a year trustee
job to his son, Mark Avery, making Mark the fifth highest-paid
foundation executive in the Bay Area ([*San Francisco Business Times*,
11/14/03](http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/06/10/BAG46QCQFB1.DTL)).
But apparently that wasn’t enough — Avery stole \$52 million from the
Foundation and fled to Alaska. ([*San Francisco Chronicle*,
6/10/07](http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/stories/2003/11/17/focus1.html?t=printable)).
This June he pled guilty and now he faces a maximum sentence of 20 years
in prison. ([U.S. Attorney for Alaska,
3/6/07](http://anchorage.fbi.gov/doj/pressrel/2007/moneylaundering030607.htm))
