Goods, Services, and Delegations
================================

July 18, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/delegation)

* * * * *

Things you can buy are typically divided into tangible things (goods)
and intangible actions (services). But recently I’ve realized there’s a
much more interesting type of thing to buy: delegations.

A delegation is like a service, except instead of asking someone to do a
specific thing, you ask them to achieve some goal. Hiring someone to
paint your wall white would be a service, hiring someone to make your
house pretty is a delegation.

Delegations are a *lot* harder than services. In the same way you can be
pretty sure that when you buy a pen it will write, you can be pretty
sure that when you hire someone to paint your wall white, she’ll
actually do it. And if she doesn’t, you can just not pay her.

But if you want to hire an interior designer, it’s a mess. Let’s say you
pick one by looking through their portfolio and concluding that you like
their work. But when they come to design your place, you hate the
result. What can you do? You say that what you got looks nothing like
the stuff in the portfolio and they’ll just say that every space is
different and so has a different result. There’s no way to ever prove
they did a bad job.

And that’s something fairly inconsequential. Imagine you’re [wrongly
charged with
murder](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/09/07/090907fa_fact_grann)
or stricken with a potentially-fatal illness. Picking the right lawyer
or doctor could make the difference between life and death.

But now there’s not even a portfolio for you to look at. Sure, you can
see if the lawyer’s won a lot of cases or if the doctor’s kept most of
her patients alive, but that doesn’t tell you much — it probably just
means they’re either very lucky or mostly choose easy cases.

Perhaps instead of looking at outcomes, you could look at the decisions
they made along the way. But even if you could get your hands on those
records, how could you possibly learn enough about law or medicine to
evaluate them? And even if you somehow tried, there’s probably all sorts
of relevant specific details about the circumstances that could never
make it into even the most detailed histories.

But it’s not just hard for the delegator — for the same reason, it’s
hard for the delegatee. If you want to be great at painting walls white,
it’s easy to get pretty immediate feedback about whether you did the job
correctly. But if you’re a elementary school teacher, you’ll really just
never know. You hope you’re helping your kids succeed in life, but
there’s no way for you to check that. And what are the chances that you
started doing everything right just by intuition?

No, the expert performance movement has shown the only way to get really
good at something is to practice, continually comparing what you did
against the results it achieved. But in any sort of delegated job this
is practically impossible: the uncertainties are too great, the feedback
loops take too long, the opportunities to practice much too rare.

Traditionally, we solve these problems by having an academic discipline
figure out the right thing to do using scale. If doctors were just on
their own, they’d still be no better than witch doctors: people would
come in with problems and they’d pick a random herb or spell to try and
pray it made the patient feel better. They’d never really know whether
they were helping or hurting. But they’re not on their own: because
medical schools can conduct randomized trials with hundreds of people,
they can just read the results and learn what actually works.

A lot is still left to individual judgment — there’s not a medical study
for every scenario and even if there was, you’d still have to choose how
to interpret the results — but there is definitely a trend toward
knowing more. And some of the most exciting developments in medicine
come from replacing human judgment with
[checklists](http://gawande.com/the-checklist-manifesto) and [decision
trees](http://www.venchar.com/2005/02/emphasizing_the.html).

But medicine is probably the best-case scenario. I’ve never heard of
lawyers reading up on the results of [statistical
trials](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/notrocketscience/2011/04/11/justice-is-served-but-more-so-after-lunch-how-food-breaks-sway-the-decisions-of-judges/)
and aesthetics is so subjective and fashion so temporary that I doubt
anything like this could ever be possible for interior designers.
(Education is probably somewhere in the middle.) How do people ever get
good at these things?

* * * * *

Part of why running a nonprofit is so hard is that pretty much all
nonprofits are delegation. Donors aren’t buying a particular thing they
know they want, they’re buying a chance to help others, without knowing
exactly what it is *they* want. And that’s why [randomized controlled
trials](http://www.povertyactionlab.org/about-j-pal) have been
transformational for the nonprofit sector — they’ve converted a
delegation into a service. [Great nonprofits](http://www.givewell.org/)
don’t have to guess at what will help people the most; they just need to
look up the most helpful service and then purchase more of it.

*[Poor Economics](http://pooreconomics.com/)* is a remarkable book if
only because it shows how crucial this is. It’s full of tales of
small-scale experiments where well-intentioned do-gooders try hard to
help some people and fail catastrophically. But they only notice because
there are academics there collecting data; in the typical nonprofit,
where the decisionmakers are far removed from the evidence on the
ground, they’d probably never know that much was going wrong ([assuming
that they even
cared](http://byliner.com/originals/three-cups-of-deceit)).

But “political” nonprofits don’t get off so easily. It’s fairly
impractical to do randomized controlled trials of things like lobbying,
public campaigning, white papers, investigative journalism, public
relations, strategic litigation, electoral campaigns, and the rest.
There are [brave and noble
efforts](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/31/magazine/31politics-t.html?pagewanted=all)
to try to improve some of the details most amenable to testing, but
while you can test which direct mail flyer makes people more likely to
vote, it’s hard to test whether GOTV mail is a good use of campaign
funds at all.

Now you can get a lot out of [combining all these
things](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ist) so you can make big-picture
decisions about how to allocate resources. And you can get a lot out of
having the same team do them over and over so they can build up
institutional expertise. But there’s also a lot of room for learning
within each one as well. Just as randomized controlled trials have
revolutionized development nonprofits, I think political nonprofits will
be revolutionized by developing institutional structures to formalize
the process of learning from campaigns.

What would this look like? A good first step would be developing a
series of case studies of major campaigns, successful or unsuccessful,
to get some sense of big picture stories. From this, you could distill a
toolbook of various tactics, with some notes on which seem to be more
and less effective and some open questions or avenues of exploration for
each. Then within each tactic, you could bring together practitioners to
swap best practices and try to improve the state of the art.

Interviewing people right after campaigns also seems like a fruitful
avenue. As they look back on what happened, what do they see as the big
mistakes? The big successes? What do they wish they’d had?

These might all seem like minor, parochial concerns, but when you stop
to realize that the world is full of huge problems that can only be
solved by collective action, figuring out how to inspire coordinated
action most effectively doesn’t just seem interesting — it seems
essential.
