Cambridge
=========

February 1, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cambridge)

* * * * *

There’s something magical about Harvard Square. I’ve hardly been all
over the world, but I’ve been a bunch of places, and nothing can quite
compare to the electricity I feel every time I visit this spot in the
center of Cambridge.

One one side, the gates of Harvard University. On another, the campus
book store. On the third, a pit where kids hang out and bands sometimes
perform and street performers crowd around. On the fourth, a shopping
district.

Cut down Dunster and you find yourself facing the Harvard Lampoon
building. Follow the road a bit and you’ll see the mix of shops and
Harvard dorms. Keep going and you’ll find the riverside. If it’s a fall
day, the trees will be turning brown and the sky and river will be blow
and a couple boats will be rowing down the stream and you’ll breathe in
the air and wonder if there could ever be any paradise more perfect.

Across the river is the tree-lined campus of the Harvard Business
School, but turn back up JFK Street and you’ll see hotels and shops and
cafes and parks and boulevards. Everything you’ll ever need is there and
cars and people intermingle, looking content.

Make a left on Brattle and follow it a ways and you’ll see a little dip
in the street. Another singer has set up shop there and kids are sitting
on the stone slab in front, listening to the songs, lying on their
backs, reading books.

Stop into the Coop or the Harvard Bookstore and you can pick up a book
of your own. Or cross the street into the famed Harvard Yard, the
tree-lined quad where college students sit and run and walk. The paths
meander past the dorms and classrooms, open up in parks with cafe tables
where vendors sell sandwiches, close up again to head towards the
library.

The library, the big building right in the middle, a giant edifice in
praise of collected knowledge, its big stone steps streaming down as if
to say *you too may be elevated*. Inside, the soaring archways, the
country’s largest library (after the Library of Congress), the floors
and floors of stacks, the underground additions, books seeping into the
groundwater of the campus.

The knowledge infects everything. Kids in the street talk about the
arrangement of bones, the politics of the economy, the topology of
mathematical spaces. Even the service staff get into the act: as you sit
in a cafe, the college dropout clerk argues with the immigrant cook
about the political necessity of marriage and the status of its legality
in various countries.

The seasons come here, just as you imagined: the sweltering heat of
summer, the overpowering beauty of fall, the snow-capped vistas of
winter, the budding excitement of spring. There is a city, an ocean, a
river, a suburb, a harbor, and a bike path. There is a subway, but it’s
not strictly necessary. The city is small enough that it can be walked
across, simple enough that it can all fit in your head. It’s not a place
that you can soon forget.
