Cherish mistakes
================

September 17, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/geremiah)

* * * * *

*This post is part six of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

This is a tale of two nonprofits.

At one, they hate making mistakes. How else could it be? “We’re not ever
going to enjoy screwing up,” they told me. But this attitude has a lot
of consequences. Everything they do has to go through several layers of
approval to make sure it’s not a mistake. And when someone does screw
up, they try to hide it.

It’s only natural — you know you’re going to get in trouble for screwing
up, so you try to fix it before anyone notices. And if you can’t do,
then your boss or your boss’s boss tries. And if no one in the
organization can fix it, and it goes all the way to the executive
director, then he tries to figure out a way to keep it from the press or
spin it appropriately, so the world never finds out they made a mistake.

At the other nonprofit, they have a very different attitude. You notice
it the first time you visit their website. Right in their navigation
bar, at the top of every page, is a link labeled “Mistakes.” Click it
and you’ll find a list of all the things they screwed up, starting with
the most horribly embarrassing one (they once promoted their group under
false names).

And it goes on to discuss mistakes big and small, core and peripheral.
They previously used flaky phones that would cut out during a call,
annoying people. They were insufficiently skeptical in some of the most
important claims they made. At times, their admissions have the tone of
a chastised teenager forced to write an apology, but together they
provide a remarkable record of all the mistakes, both crucial and
mundane, you might reasonably make when starting something new.

It’s not that this group likes making mistakes — you can feel the
annoyance and embarrassment seeping through the page — but they don’t
shirk from them either. They identify their mistake, admit them
publicly, and devise steps to avoid them next time. They use it as an
opportunity to get better.

* * * * *

I [wrote before](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck) about Carol
Dweck’s studies of successful and unsuccessful kids, but there’s one bit
that really jumped out at me. Given a really tough puzzle to solve, one
growth mindset kid just smiles and says “Mistakes are our
friend.”^[1](#fn:d2)^

*Mistakes are our friend.* They can be an exasperating friend sometimes,
the kind whose antics embarrass and annoy, but their heart is in the
right place: they want to help. It’s a bad idea to ignore our friends.

That’s a hard attitude to take toward mistakes — they’re so
embarrassing, our natural instinct is to want to hide them and cover
them up. But that’s the wrong way to think about them. They’re actually
giving us a gift, because they’re pointing the way toward getting
better.

If we try to ignore them, they’ll keep nagging at us. We’ll run into
them again and again in different guises. You’ll say “Don’t be silly,
that wasn’t a mistake — I meant to do that.” And then you’ll eagerly do
the same thing next time ([cognitive dissonance
again](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)). Or else you’ll say
“Yes, yes, of course that was a mistake — it won’t happen again.” But as
you hurry to move on, you don’t change anything, and so it does happen
again.

The trick is to confront the mistake, fess up to what went wrong, and
think about what you can change to keep it from happening again. Usually
just promising not to do it again is not enough: you need to dig into
the root causes and address those.

Sakichi Toyoda, the founder of the Toyota car company, developed a
technique called “Five Why’s” for handling this. For example, sometimes
a car would come off the Toyota production line and not start. Why?
Well, imagine it was because the alternator belt had come loose. Most
car companies would stop here and just fix the alternator belt. But
Toyoda understood that was dodging the mistake — it would just lead it
to come back again and again. So he insisted they keep asking “Why?”.

Why was the alternator belt loose? Because it hadn’t been put on
correctly. Why? Because the person putting it on didn’t double-check to
see if it had fit in correctly. Why? Because he was in too much of a
hurry. Why? Because he had to walk all the way to the other side of the
line to get the belts and by the time he got back he didn’t have enough
time to double-check.

Aha! There, on the fifth why, we find the real cause of the mistake. And
the solution is easy: move the box of alternator belts closer. But if
we’d stopped at any earlier point (say, by just yelling at the
alternator belt guy to always remember to double-check), we wouldn’t
have actually fixed the problem. The same mistake would have happened
again and again. Only by digging all the way to the root cause did we
realize we needed to move the box of belts. The mistake pointed the way
to the solution.

* * * * *

The last time I wrote about two nonprofits, someone commented to say
they were “outright nauseated” by my post. “[T]he website is not the
place to signal humility and argue against your own conclusions. All
that would demonstrate is naivety and incompetence,” they insisted. And
maybe they’re right: maybe having a mistakes page at the top of your
website goes much too far.

I’ve [written before](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis) why I
disagree, but even if they’re right that you shouldn’t tell the world
about your mistakes, you need to at least tell yourself. It’s much too
easy to conveniently forget about all the stuff you screwed up. And so
even though it happens again and again, you never notice the pattern.

By forcing yourself to write it down, to keep a log of the problems
you’ve run into, you begin to see patterns. You start seeing the things
you get better at and the things you keep flubbing. And then you know
what to work on for next time.

**Next in this series:** [Fix the machine, not the
person](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/nummi)

* * * * *

1.  Carol Dweck, *Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality,
    and Development* (2000), 10. [↩](#fnref:d2)


