Identity Fetishism
==================

November 21, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/idfetish)

* * * * *

Marx wrote incisively about commodity fetishism—the tendency of people
to see only the results of production (commodities), ignoring the hours
of human labor that actually created them. The humanities seems to
suffer from something of the reverse problem: a tendency to be absorbed
by the names of big people and not seeing beyond to the ideas they
espouse.

The most extreme example is Leo Strauss, who encouraged his students to
put aside their prejudices and fully imerse themselves in the worlds and
minds of the greats. The greats were so great, Strauss suggested, that
if you disagree with them, you probably just don’t understand them well
enough.

But even other teachers of philosophy have the same problem, presenting
the views of X and Y even when X is pretty clearly wrong. Despite its
absurdities, students must learn to understand X’s view. This seems
fairly universal; even books like *What is the Meaning of it All?*,
which explains philosophy without the names or complex terminology,
still presents clearly bogus ideas on the same footing as more
reasonable ones.

In other fields, this pattern is less frequent, but still there for
whole courses of research. In sociology, papers must cite long-dead
patron theorists to lend their empirical research an air of legitimacy
by presenting it as a member of a recognized family. Even more recent
works, like Annette Lareau’s brilliant *Unequal Childhoods*, are at
pains to show how they adhere to a theoretical model (the recently-alive
Bourdieu in that case). In most other fields, the theorists take pains
to make sure their work is consistent with the evidence, not the other
way around.

Even in most humanities classes, the course content consists of a series
of papers making arguments. The goal of the class is to understand the
view of the authors and determine (in the best ones) to what extent you
agree or disagree.

This isn’t particularly unreasonable, but is a far cry from life in the
hard sciences, where usually there is an actual consensus on some
subject and otherwise there are a couple of named theories, each being
developed by a group of people.

Why the diference? First, is it perhaps hard science that’s in the
wrong? I don’t think so. The goal of science is to discover the truth
about the world. Truths remain true no matter who says them and it’s
unlikely that one person will discover the whole truth. Thus the pattern
of letting multiple people develop a theory and try to find evidence for
it to convince the others.

So why don’t the softer sciences follow the same model? The problem gets
worse the softer you get, which suggests the problem lies in the
softness itself. The problem is that without identities, one has to
judge the ideas themselves which, in a soft science is somewhat
difficult to do.

It’s easy in science to run an experiment and see if it proves a theory
true or false, it’s much harder to get consensus about a reasonable
theory of morality in philosophy. But it is easy to pick out the famous
in academy culture and assign their stuff.

Identity fetishism thrives in a world afraid to make its own judgments.
It exalts the thinkers of the past and, in doing so, diminishes its own
capacities. But science must march forward instead of backward and that
requires the daring to distinguish true from false.
