Making More Wikipedians
=======================

September 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: **Making More Wikipedians**\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Wikipedia, the Vice President of the *World Book* told us, is now
recognized by ten percent of Americans. He presented this in a tone of
congratulation: with no marketing budget or formal organization, a free
online-only encyclopedia written by volunteers had achieved a vast
amount of attention. But I took it a different way. “Only ten percent?”
I thought. “That means we have ninety percent to go!”

Wikipedia is one of the few things that pretty much everyone finds
useful. So how do we get all of them to use it? The first task, it
appears, is telling them it exists. An ad campaign or PR blitz doesn’t
quite seem appropriate for the job, though. Instead, our promotion
should work the same way way the rest of Wikipedia works: let the
community do it.

Wikipedia’s users come from all over society: different cultures,
different countries, different places, different fields of study. The
physics grad students who contribute heavily to physics articles are in
a much better position to promote it to physicists than a promotional
flack from the head office. The Pokemon fan maintaining the Pokemon
articles probably knows how to reach other Pokemaniacs than any
marketing expert.

Sure, you might say, but isn’t the whole question of marketing Wikipedia
somewhat silly? After all, you obviously know about Wikipedia, and your
friends probably all seem to as well. But things are a lot thinner than
you might expect: as noted above, only one in ten Americans even knows
what Wikipedia is, and most of those don’t truly understand it.

It’s shocking to discover how even smart, technically-minded people
can’t figure out how to actually edit Wikipedia. Dave Winer wrote some
of the first software to have an “Edit This Page” button (indeed, he
operated editthispage.com for many years) and yet he at first complained
that he couldn’t figure out how to edit a page on Wikipedia. Michael
Arrington reviews advanced Web 2.0 websites daily, yet [he
noted](http://www.techcrunch.com/2005/07/12/profile-wikipedia/) that
“Many people don’t realize how easy it is for anyone to add content to
wikipedia (I’ve done it several times)”. If prominent technologists have
trouble, imagine the rest of the world.

Obviously, this has implications for the software side: we need to work
hard on making Wikipedia’s interface clearer and more usable. But
there’s also a task here for the community: giving talks and tutorials
to groups that you know about, explaining the core ideas behind
Wikipedia, and giving demonstrations of how to get involved in it. The
best interface in the world is no substitute for real instruction and
even the clearest document explaining our principles will be ignored in
a way that a personal presentation won’t.

But beyond simply giving people the ability to contribute, we need to
work to make contributing more rewarding. [As I previously
noted](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments), many people decide
to dive into writing for Wikipedia, only to watch their contributions be
summarily reverted. Many people create a new article, only to see it get
deleted after an AfD discussion where random Wikipedians try to think up
negative things to say about it. For someone who thought they were
donating their time to help the project, neither response is
particularly encouraging.

I’m not saying that we should change our policies or automatically keep
everything a newcomer decides to add so we don’t hurt their feelings.
But we do need to think more about how to enforce policies without
turning valuable newcomers away, how we can educate them instead of
alienating them.

At Wikimania, no less an authority than Richard Stallman (who himself
long ago [suggested the idea](http://www.gnu.org/encyclopedia/) of a
free online encyclopedia) wandered around the conference complaining
about a problem he’d discovered with a particular Wikipedia article. He
could try to fix it himself, he noted, but it would take an enormous
amount of his time and the word would probably just get reverted. He’s
not the only one — I constantly hear tales from experts about problems
they encounter on Wikipedia, but are too complicated for them to fix
alone. What if we could collect these complaints on the site, instead of
having these people make them at parties?

One way to do that would be to have some sort of complaint-tracking
system for articles, like the discussion system of talk pages. Instead
of simply complaining about an article in public, Stallman could follow
a link from it to file a complaint. The complaint would be tracked and
stored with the article. More dedicated Wikipedians would go through the
list of complaints, trying to address them and letting the submitter
know when they were done. Things like POV allegations could be handled
in a similar way: a notice saying neutrality was disputed could appear
on the top of the page until the complaint was properly closed.

This is just one idea, of course, but it’s an example of the kinds of
things we need to think about. Wikipedia is visited by millions each
day; how do get them to contribute back their thoughts on the article
instead of muttering them under their breath or airing them to their
friends?
