Ode to a Blue Bicycle
=====================

March 11, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bluebike)

* * * * *

For the longest time, I treated my bicycle as an extension of myself. I
would strap on my helmet and jacket, fit myself into the seat, and
firmly attach my arms to the handle bars and go. From then on, I saw
myself as the bicycle. When I wanted to turn left, I’d rotate my arms
left and we’d all move left. I didn’t think of it as having the bike
move left and staying on the bike — I thought of it as moving left. The
bike was a part of me.

It’s the same way I think of a car. You buckle into your seatbelt and
suddenly you grow to become this huge hunk of metal that tears down the
road. Moving left or right is now done through the steering wheel, but
it still seems like you’re the one who’s doing the moving.

Body parts act kind of like our agents. When I want to raise my hand, I
simply think to do so and my hand flies up. I let the rest of my body
worry about the details. Similarly, when I want my bike to turn left I
simply rotate the handle and let it use its momentum to wheel me over.

But here’s the thing. I recently bought a nice, new, blue bike. And
something strange happened. I stopped seeing it as an extension of my
body, and started seeing it as just another tool. And suddenly riding it
became a lot more fun.

I didn’t have to stay attached to the bike all the time. I could keep
one foot on a pedal and swing the other one over. Or I could go left
while the bike went right, the two of us swinging back and forth in a
counterweight dance. Or I could let the bike go ahead of me or behind
me.

It seems counterintuitive that you’d get more out of a bike when you
started treating it as a tool. People speak in glowing terms of how
their cars act as extensions of their body, a perfect meld between mind
and machine. And maybe that makes sense for cars (they’re big and
confusing enough that there’s not much else you can do). But I think
this is another case of [the genius being in the
details](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smartabstractions). Once I saw
the bike as a bike, I could use it in ways that weren’t particularly
intended.
