Alone in the Hospital
=====================

September 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitalbabies)

* * * * *

Going to the hospital has never been particularly safe, but hospitals
have tried to do what they can. In the early part of the 1900s,
hospitals became fanatical about sterility, to prevent infection. Each
infant in their care, for example, had its own white coat for doctors to
wear as they visited that infant, hung on hooks inside out for the next
doctor to don. Holding babies was considered dangerous (as signage
emphasized), so they were fed without being held — bottles were simply
propped up where the infants could get at them. Needless to say, parents
were denied visits.

And yet mortality rates for infants in hospital care ranged from 30 to
75 percent. The babies were cared for and nourished, they had no outward
physical problems, they simply succumbed to a mysterious phenomenon the
doctors labeled “failure to thrive”. Some thought it might be a hidden
infection.

So the nurses wore masks and hoods, carefully scrubbed up before they
handled infants. Some hospitals put infants in boxes with glove-valves —
the kinds you see in movies when scientists are handling radioactive
material — so that they’d never have to touch the infant at all. But the
problem just got worse.

Henry Bakwin, pediatric director of New York’s Bellevue Hospital, saw
this and thought that perhaps they were going about things exactly
wrong. The infants weren’t dying of infection, he believed, they were
dying of loneliness — a loneliness that made it easier for them to
succumb to infection. He took down the signs about washing hands and put
up signs requiring everyone to pick up and fondle a baby. And infection
rates went down.

Harold Skeels and a team at the Iowa Child Research Welfare Station
decided to try an experiment. They took thirteen girls out of
institutionalized care and had them “adopted” by older girls in “a home
for the feeble-minded”. Within nineteen months, the average IQs of the
adopted kids jumped from 64 to 92.

But these folks were the radicals. The mainstream scientific community
refused to believe there was anything wrong — people were blowing things
out of proportion, they insisted, and anyway, everyone knows children
that young can’t suffer from depression. The studies were flawed.

John Bowlby came at it from a different perspective. Interviewing
severely disturbed kids, he discovered they all shared a traumatic
separation from their parents when they were young. He concluded the
mother-infant relationship was essential to development and issued
recommendations much like Skeels and Spitz. “The mothering of a child is
not something which can be arranged by roster,” he wrote in reports for
the World Health Organization. But still the hospitals didn’t change.

Bowlby’s student John Robertson begun doing observation at hospitals. He
noticed that babies screamed painfully as they were admitted. The nurses
explained that this was normal and they’d soon settle down. He noticed
that these “settled” babies returned to violent fits when they were
taken home, attacking her as if they blamed her. The nurses said that
was normal too, mothers weren’t just as good at taking care of kids as
the nurses. Robertson had a different explanation.

He decided to make a movie to prove it. Unlike the last, this one would
be completely scientific. He would pick a name at random from the list
of babies, then always film them at a specific hour, clock in the
background, so you could tell he wasn’t cheating. The name he picked was
Laura.

When he went to find her he was devastated: Laura was the one girl in a
hundred who wasn’t crying; her parents had reared her so strictly that
she quietly restrained all her emotions. “I saw immediately [she] was
going to be the one child in a hundred who was not going to demonstrate
what I had been shouting my head off [about],” Robertson said. But he
couldn’t pick another child — that would be cheating. The project
continued.

The first day, Laura jumped out of her bath to the door in an attempt to
escape. Her smiles disappear and sometimes she quietly sobs while
clutching her teddy. “Where’s my mummy?” she asks repeatedly, while
trying hard to hold back tears. Each day she grows grayer until on the
fifth, when she appears unsmiling and resentful. Her mother comes to
visit (thanks to a special exception to the rules Robertson negotiated),
but she wipes away her mother’s kiss. When her mother waves goodbye, she
looks away. When her mother finally comes to take her home on the eight
day, she begins shaking with sobs. She gathers up all of her stuff, but
refuses to take her mother’s hand as they walk out.

They presented the film to the Royal Society of Medicine in London. The
audience was outraged. It was false, it was slander, it was a trick, it
was an atypical child, it was filmed selectively, it was edited
dishonestly. “People stood up and said that their children’s wards were
not like that, two-year-olds were all happy,” Robertson recalls.
Robertson was banned from some of the wards he was observing,
pediatricians walked across the street when they encountered him. The
hospital claimed that Robertson had interfered with the nurses trying to
care for Laura. As Robertson toured Britain with the film, the reaction
was always the same.

When Laura finally saw the film, six months later, she burst into tears.
“Where were you all that time?” she asked her mother.

Reviews in the medical journals, however, were all positive. And younger
nurses and doctors begun telling Robertson how they agreed with him and
would do things differently, if only they were in charge. And a few
higher-ups quietly sent some votes of support. So Robertson kept going.
He took the film to the United States, hoping for a similarly positive
reception. But the Americans insisted that while it was a great film
about Britain, it had no relevance in their country. And nobody was
willing to take the obvious step of letting mothers stay with their
children on the wards.

Not until 1955 were there signs of change. Fred Stone, a doctor at the
Royal Hospital in Glasgow, decided to do a pilot study. “I would drive
up the hill to come here,” he recalled, “and there would be two hundred
parents queueing up in the rain to get in for their half hour’s
visiting.” A colleague who had control of two pediatric wards decided to
offer one of them to Stone to prove that his suggestions wouldn’t work.

When the nurses heard about this, they threatened to resign together. To
placate them, Stone set up a series of meetings. “The aggression after
the first meetings was unbelievable, truly unbelievable,” he explained.
But the aggression soon turned to tears. “They said, ‘You don’t
understand what you are asking of us. [You mean] a parent can just walk
in and see how we’re neglecting these poor kids[?]’ […] And, of course,
at that point we had to say, ‘But what on earth makes you think that
we’re criticizing you? You’re doing an impossible job remarkably well.’
And, of course, then the tears came as you can imagine.” Finally they
agreed the experiment should at least be tried.

“I never heard any more about the issue at all. Nobody ever came back to
me and said, ‘The six months are up.’ Nobody ever reported that it had
been a success or a failure; all I knew was that somehow I heard that
two wards were doing it, four wards were doing it, the whole hospital
was doing it. And since then we’ve had almost unrestricted visiting in
the whole hospital.”

Similar experiments were conducted in London, although changes on the
Continent didn’t happen until the late 1970s. In 1959, the British
minister of health made it official policy. And in the early 1960s,
Robertson told BBC Radio parents that they should sit-in by their
children’s cot and force the hospital to try to evict them. Slowly the
tide began to turn.

*This article is based on Robert Karen’s tour de force book* [Becoming
Attached](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015).
