Is Apple Evil?
==============

January 27, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ipad)

* * * * *

Today’s iPad introduction has to be about the most depressing Apple
product launch I’ve ever watched. As has been
[noted](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2009/09/18/siegler-jobs), Jobs’
Reality Distortion Field only works when he believes in what he’s
selling and he didn’t seem to really believe in this. The audience must
have further added to the disappointment, expecting a revolutionary
product and only getting an oversized iPhone (iPod touch, actually).

That’s not to say the iPad won’t sell, or that I don’t want one. The
scariest thing is that I think it probably will. It’s clear that Apple
plans for the iPhone OS to be the future of its product line. And that’s
scary because the iPhone OS is designed for Apple’s total control.

A lot of people have argued that requiring Apple to approve every
application for the iPhone OS is some kind of “mistake”, something
they’ll remedy as soon as they realize how bad things have gotten. But
recent events — Phil Schiller’s personal interventions, comments on
their call to analysts, etc. — have made it clear it’s not a mistake at
all. It’s their plan.

The iPad is their attempt to extend this total control to what’s
traditionally been thought of as the computer space. This is just the
first step, but it’s not hard to imagine Apple doing their best to phase
out the Macintosh in the next decade, just as they phased out OS 9. In
their ideal world, all computing will be done on the iPhone OS.

And the iPhone OS will only run software that they specifically approve.
No Flash or other alternate runtimes, no one-off apps or open source
customizations. Just total control by Apple. It’s a frightening future.

I don’t know why they’re doing it. It’s hard to see how it makes them
more money. (Curating all those apps must be expensive, not to mention
the lost sales from the unapproved ones.) I can only presume it’s a
result of Jobs’ megalomaniacal need for control — not only does the
hardware have to be flawless, the software must be too. And the only way
to ensure that is to have Apple approve every inch of it.

I love Apple products. I’m a huge Apple fan. I’d buy an iPad right now
if I could. But, for the first time, I’ve got a real sinking feeling in
my stomach.
