Kafka for the Kindergarten Set
==============================

November 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kindergartenkafka)

* * * * *

Just as Bush’s Healthy Forests Initiative cut down more trees and his
Clean Skies Initiative increased pollution, his No Child Left Behind Act
hurt students, especially poor students. That this is a controversial
statement shows just how rare genuine child advocates are (compared to,
say, environmentalists) in policy debates.

NCLB requires every school administer standardized tests to their
students. If the scores are bad, they get punished. (This makes as much
sense as beating kids who lose races.) And it only gets worse from
there. Making high test scores the ultimate goal of education distorts
everything along the way, sending schools spiraling own into a
Kafkaesque nightmare of bureaucratic child torture.

[![Book
cover](image1_kindergartenkafka)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088024)

The story is told in up-close detail in Linda Perlstein’s *Tested*, a
profile of Tyler Heights elementary in Maryland. It’s a tale of such
thoroughgoing rot that it’s hard to even know where to begin. But let’s
start with the tests. They’re invasive and traumatic. They take time and
teachers away from class and scare students (especially since the kids
are led to believe they won’t graduate if they fail). They test narrow,
specific knowledge in dumb ways (“What text features made the directions
[in this cookie recipe] easy for third graders to follow?”). And they
make kids feel like failures in situations where teachers are prohibited
from helping.

The tests are just plain bad. Their questions are invariably annoying
and sometimes just plain bizarre (“Which word is made up of two
words?”). Of the handful of examples in the book (which are for 3rd
graders), even I get some of them wrong. They assume weird background
knowledge (which two presses are the same? “don’t press me”, “full-court
press”, “tailor press”, “press agent”, “pressing for an answer”) and
strange vocab (crabapples and cattails) and are just terribly written,
full of stilted jargon.

But that’s just the beginning. Since the tests are so all-important,
everything gets pushed around for them. Art and gym are cancelled
(although, for contractual reasons, not in the school Perlstein studied)
since they’re not tested, as is recess (this despite evidence recess
improves test scores!). But even more absurdly, science and social
studies are canceled too, since the test questions don’t address them.

The remaining time is spent teaching to the test. Test language
infiltrates everything. The only writing students ever do is sample
short-answer sections (“What text feature could have been added to help
a reader better understand the information?”, as opposed to writing your
own story). Even the stories kids read are analyzed only in terms of
potential test questions.

Much of class is filled with pure test-prep: no actual education, just
test-taking tricks. Some of it is common stuff — take deep breaths, work
until the time is called, eliminate obviously wrong answers — but most
of it is specific to the state’s bizarre test (special rules about how
to phrase written answers and which words to use for extra points). The
walls are filled with the school’s four-point plans for successful
responses, e.g. BATS, which stands for “borrow from the question, answer
the question, use text supports, stretch formula”.

It only gets worse from there. Apparently even non-stop test prep
doesn’t raise scores enough, so schools are forced to use
“evidence-based curricula” like “Saxon Math” and “Open Court Reading”.
These are special packages of textbooks and workbooks and scripts for
the teachers which prescribe specifically which stories and “text
features” should be taught in which order and in which way. (Teachers
can’t deviate from the script, of course, because that’s not
“evidence-based”.) The whole system must be purchased for a small
fortune from a major textbook company and supervisors occasionally drop
in to make sure the books are being used appropriately.

It’s clear the books don’t teach any actual understanding; they’re just
teaching kids to memorize the answers to various test prep questions.
When asked a question, the students just cycle through random
combinations of test buzzwords until they hit upon the right answer.
Since they never get to read for fun, or even read for anything other
than dissecting text features, they presumably learn to hate reading
too.

But the stilted curricula is just the beginning of the scammers. In
their desperation to raise scores up, schools are open to predation by a
whole suite of consultants and teams who promise to have the winning
secret to raising test scores. (One of the book’s most poignant scenes
comes at an educational conference, when one such scam artist takes
credit for the profiled school’s test score rise.) And so the teachers
are forced to do absurd things like write the state educational
guidelines they plan to fulfill that day on the board, assign practice
tests weekly, have their teaching evaluated by non-educators who observe
them for fifteen minutes, and hold school assemblies on test prep
featuring men in furry blue muppet costumes.

Together, it’s a frightening picture: no recess, no science, no social
studies, no leaving your chair or working in groups, just sitting in
your seat, listening to scripts and test-prep advice, before worrying
you’re about fail school because you have no idea what they’re saying.
This is what they mean when they say “No Child Left Behind”.

* * * * *

Every year, a couple months before school ends, a kind of controlled
experiment happens in NCLB schools: The principal remains the same, the
teachers remain the same, the students remain the same. The only thing
that changes is that the test is over, forgotten until next year starts.
And suddenly everything changes: test prep boards come off the wall,
students start writing poetry, they go on field trips and do science
experiments, they work in groups and do real reading.

I challenge anyone to watch both schools and insist that the first is
better for our kids. I don’t think you could do it. So, of course,
nobody watches. Decisions on these laws are made far away, in DC, by
folks whose only experience of public school comes from staged photo
ops.

Everyone loves to critique No Child Left Behind. Democrats say it isn’t
fully funded, Republicans say it interferes too much with local control
of schools. But this is just tinkering around the edges — nobody
disagrees with the fundamental premise. After all, what politician can
be against accountability?

The only question left is: who will hold them accountable?

[image1_kindergartenkafka]: image1_kindergartenkafka.jpg