SFP: First Contact
==================

June 15, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfpmtg1)

* * * * *

Most of what a startup — or at least this startup — is about is solving
various technical problems, fixing bugs, getting stuff done. At its
worst, this stuff is boring to do. And even at its best it’s hard to
describe and not much fun to hear. On the plane here I wrote a memoir
about my time with the W3C and what was striking was not just that I
omitted all the technical stuff from the story but that I don’t even
remember the technical stuff. People stuff, on the other hand…

So I’ve been holed up by myself in this elegant MIT dorm room. ([more
photos](http://www.figure-ground.com/travel/image.php?simmons) ([my
favorite](http://www.figure-ground.com/travel/image.php?simmons/0029)))
Jessica (formerly 4 of 4 from Y Combinator, the group that’s funding the
startup I’m working on) stopped by to drop off a lifesaving air
conditioner and we chatted for a bit. I get out once or twice a day to
go get food at someplace nearby. And at nights I sleep. But most of the
time I just work.

Y Combinator has weekly meetings where all the startups go over to their
offices for dinner. I missed last week’s because I didn’t have a dorm
and so when I get there I don’t recognize anyone. I sort of wander
around alone trying not to look too stupid, which is what I normally do
at parties anyway.

At some point we sit down at a long table with benches that they’ve
placed in the room, which looks even nicer than before, with elegantly
placed lights and abstract art on the walls. During some pre-dinner
conversation someone makes a pun. “You know, I read somewhere that bad
puns are highly correlated with IQ,” Paul says. ‘I find that hard to
believe,’ responds a founder, ‘I know some people who make lots of puns
and, well…’ ‘Correlations aren’t perfect,’ responds another. ‘And IQ
isn’t necessarily correlated with intelligence,’ comments Paul. I was
really glad to see he’d [backed off this
claim](http://www.paulgraham.com/start.html#footnote2). (I was thinking
about chiming in but I was at the very edge of the table and planning to
save my disagreements until after the money is in the bank.)

They plan to get a guest speaker each dinner; this week it was a patent
attorney, who admitted that patents were expensive and not very useful
to a startup he suggested (and cited a study that argued) they would be
useful later on. He gave us all packets and branded cell phone holders
but I forgot to take mine home.

Afterwards there was more talking. One group of founders described their
history. ‘Well, we haven’t really done any legitimate businesses
before,’ they said. ‘What illegitimate businesses have you done?’ I
asked. ‘Oh, adult entertainment, student term papers — nothing illegal
but not the sort of things you want to show to VCs!’

I got to talk to rtm which was really wonderful and at some point I
found myself in a conversation with Paul and a couple other people. Paul
asked me if I could send him a copy of [the infamous
paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sneakpeek) and another person
chimed in ‘oh you’re definitely sending me a copy.’ ‘Wait, you know
about this?’ asked Paul. ‘You don’t?’ replied the third person. It
turned out everyone there had read my blog. ‘Oh,’ said Paul, ‘I only
started reading it when it started mentioning *me*!’

Not long afterward a group of people behind me pulled me away and
introduced themselves. ‘And who are you?’ they asked. Paul, from behind
me, said ‘this is *Aaron Swartz*; you don’t know who *Aaron Swartz* is?
He co-authored RSS!’ ‘Oh,’ said the kid, ‘well then you made me quite a
bit of money!’

At some point Jessica pulled me aside to go over the legal paperwork of
which there is quite a bit.

A group of Russian kids offered to drive me home in their van. ‘We’re
actually agents from the KGB,’ they explained, laughing, in their thick
Russian accents, ‘we were sent here to spy on you. We bought a van
because we were told all Americans drive vans. We try to blend in.’ They
certainly made the most of it, swerving back and forth across the street
and making crazy turns. Amazingly, though, we managed to find my place
and they dropped me off.
