The Trouble with Nonprofits
===========================

September 7, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/measurenonprofit)

* * * * *

In the 1990s, a group of psychologists began studying what made experts
expert. Their first task was to see whether experts really were expert —
whether they were particularly good at their jobs.

What they found was that some were and some weren’t. Champion chess
players, obviously, are much better at playing chess than you and I. But
political pundits, it turns out, aren’t that much better at making
predictions than a random guy off the street.

What distinguishes people who are great at what they do from those who
are just mediocre? The answer, it seems, is feedback. If you lose a
chess game, it’s pretty obvious you lost. You know right away, you feel
bad, and you start thinking about what you did wrong and how you can
improve.

Making a bad prediction isn’t like that. First, it’s months or years
before your prediction is [proven wrong](http://wrongtomorrow.com/). And
then, you make yourself feel better by coming up with some explanation
for why you were wrong: *well, nobody expected that to happen; it threw
everything else off!* And so you keep on making predictions in the same
way — which means you never get good at it.

The difference between chess and predictions is a lot like the
difference between companies and nonprofits. If your company is losing
money, it’s pretty obvious. You know right away, you feel bad, and you
start thinking about how to fix it. (And if you don’t fix it, you go
bankrupt.) But if your nonprofit isn’t accomplishing its goals, it’s
much less obvious. You can point to various measurable signs of success
(look at all the members we have, look at all the articles we’ve been
quoted in) and come up with all sorts of explanations for why it’s not
your fault.

This isn’t to say that we should have companies replace nonprofits, any
more than we should have chess games replace predictions. The two serve
completely different goals — nonprofits aim at improving the world, not
making money. But it does mean that if you’re involved in nonprofits (or
predictions), you need to be much more careful about making sure you’re
doing a good job.

Unfortunately, few nonprofits do that. Take, for example, the Center for
American Progress, widely believed to be one of the most effective
political nonprofits. They say their goal is “improving the lives of
Americans through ideas and action.” But their “marketing brochure,”
while filled with glossy photos, doesn’t even attempt to see whether
they’re accomplishing this goal. It touts that they’ve released “an
economic strategy for the next administration,” “convened a task force …
to develop policy,” and “developed a plan for the bulk transfer auction
of at-risk mortgages.” There’s not a single attempt to demonstrate that
any of these things has approved the lives of Americans, let alone
estimate how much.

Measuring things is hard and expensive, even in the simplest cases.
Measuring the effect of loaning money to Africans seems a lot easier
than measuring the impact of of a think tank report. But when Peter
Singer asked Oxfam to measure the effectiveness of giving microcredit to
villages in West Africa, they declined, on the grounds that it would
have taken up half the budget.

But not measuring is even more expensive. Imagine that Oxfam
experimented with two microcredit programs and found that one did 10%
better than the other. Even with this very modest improvement, it would
only take helping five villages before the experiment paid for itself.

And, as anyone who’s done these sorts of experiments knows, you often
see improvements well in excess of 10%. To take a silly example, [Dustin
Curtis
experimented](http://dustincurtis.com/you_should_follow_me_on_twitter.html)
with getting more readers of his weblog to follow him on Twitter. After
four experiments, he’d achieved a 173% improvement. And even this is
probably underestimating things. I expect many nonprofits are not
accomplishing their goals *at all*. Even if they made a little bit of
progress, their improvement would be mathematically infinite. (It’s also
quite possible that many nonprofits are actually being
*counter*-productive. After all, before we started measuring the effects
of medical treatment, we were bleeding people with leeches.)

What can be done about this? I think that everyone who donates to a
nonprofit should demand an accounting of results — not just the number
of times they’ve been cited in the media or the number of policy
discussions they’ve held, but an actual attempt to measure how much
they’re improving people’s lives. For most nonprofits, I expect these
numbers will be depressingly small. But that’s much better than having
no numbers at all. For feeling bad about failing is the first step to
doing better next time.
