Fear and Loathing in Biotechnology Firms
========================================

July 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fearandbio)

* * * * *

I was sitting with my journalist and reading *Fear and Loathing* when I
noticed that things weren’t seeming the way I’d become accustomed to
them seeming. For one thing, my journalist’s nose seemed a fair sight
bigger than one would expect a nose to be, even accounting for taste,
while her eyes seemed to be moving back and forth in her head as if they
weren’t quite sure whether they preferred it in or out.

Still, I shouldn’t criticize. I suspect I didn’t look my usual self
either, what with my head making those small wobbly notions on my neck
and my leg vibrating back and forth as if it were thinking very hard
about something. Why it was forced to work as my leg, supporting me all
the time while i gave it no consideration in return, perhaps.

As I finished the book I slammed it down on the desk, causing a couple
other books to fall off the side. “We must rent a very fast car,” I
demanded, before scrunching up my face in an inevitably doomed attempt
to get a look at myself. I didn’t normally sound like this.

My journalist agreed, so we popped some pills and picked up a BMW. It
was a little past midnight at the time, so you could hardly notice the
car’s nasty habit of accelerating right up to the edge of other cars,
stopping hard a couple inches before it hit them.

“We must find a heart of darkness,” said my journalist. I just looked at
her. She continued mumbling about a heart of darkness while stepping on
the accelerator. I decided to look away. She continued to make friends
with the accelerator. “I’ve got it—” she shouted, wrenching the car
around, “Vacaville!”

My journalist assured me that Vacaville was a small city outside San
Francisco filled with giant vats of transgenic mutant corn that cured
cancer. I wasn’t quite sure what any of that really was, let alone which
part of that was a heart of darkness. My fears were not allayed when we
pulled off the freeway under a giant light-up sign that said “Authentic
Historic Vacaville”, only to see a couple 7-11s and a CostCo. We got
back on the freeway.

The next time we got off the freeway, there were a dozen industrial
buildings with sinister yellow lighting belching vast plumes of smoke
into the air. We ditched the car behind a tree, dropped our wallets and
identification in it, and, arm-in-arm, begun strolling through a place
which had even less claim to the title of Authentic Historic Vacaville.

In 2006, the leading biotechnology firm Genentech was named the number
one “Best Company To Work For” by *Fortune Magazine*. I suppose this
incredible allure could explain why the company’s campus was surrounded
by barbed wire. It did not, however, explain why the barbed wire was
facing *in*.

There are a couple of ways to get into the Genentech campus. You can
climb the barbed wire fence. You can swipe an ID badge and go through
the imposing metal turnstiles. You can drive past the guard at the main
gate and show some kind of ID. Or you can find the side gate that they
forgot to lock and open it. My journalist didn’t want to scratch her
pants, so we used the side gate.

And that was how we found ourselves strolling in the moonlight around
the factories of a leading biotechnology firm.

“This place is incredible,” my journalist said, as we approached it.
“Construction worker,” I said, as I spotted a man walking through the
corridors of the empty new building. We continued walking around it.

“I’m always morally torn by major biotech companies,” she explained.
“Smoke break,” I said, as the construction worker stepped outside the
building and paused.

“On the one hand, this place makes drugs that save people’s lives —
treatments for cancers and cystic fibrosis and asthma,” she told me.
“Heading out,” I told her, as the construction worker walked across the
campus towards the gate.

“And yet, on the other hand, this place is pure evil.” We walked past
large vats labeled “Poison” and huge machines that looked like they
could crush us. Smoke belched from the top of the building and we could
see more buildings and a parking lot in the distance.

“Companies like this are made up of dozens of people, each of whom,
individually, are the sweetest guys. Nice, friendly people who just care
about doing well at their work.” As we approached the buildings, we saw
that even now — 2AM — the place was alive. New cars were pulling into
the lot and men and women were walking from building to building. The
yellowed light on their white lab coats gave the whole thing a sinister
air.

“And yet, together, they manage to pull off the most incomprehensible
evils.” I was about to join her discussion of organizational sociology
when I heard a go-kart pull up behind us.

“Excuse me,” said the man in the go-kart. “Do you folks work here?”

I was about to come up with some explanation but my journalist dodged in
front of me and saved me the trouble.

“No, sir,” she said, with complete sincerity.

“Do you have visitors’ badges?” asked the man, sounding a bit puzzled.

“Definitely not,” she said.

“Are you supposed to be here?”

“No way. Actually, we were just going for a stroll when we found
ourselves in this bizarre place. We were wondering if you could tell us
how to get out.”

The man in the go-kart thought about this for a while before getting out
of the kart and walking towards us. As he stepped into the light I could
see he was wearing a bright orange vest.

“Huh, well the fastest way to get out of the facility from here is
probably to walk through the entire campus,” he explained.

“Oh, I see,” said the journalist. “Well, could you escort us off the
premises then?” she asked. I restrained myself from kicking her.

The man in the vest looked back at the go-kart, where his partner was
sitting. “Nah, my there’s no more room in the kart,” he said.

“Oh, well then maybe you could take us to security?” she said. I dug a
small hole in the ground, placed my foot into it, then used the other
foot to fill it back up with dirt in a vain attempt to stop myself from
kicking her.

“I’m actually not allowed to take you guys to Genentech security,” he
said. “See, I’m over with construction. One of my men came by and told
me that he saw to people walking around the premises, so I just came to
check it out.” He thought about this for a while. “Let me see if I can
find you someone,” he said.

And that is how we got a burly man in a bright orange vest to escort us
onto the Genetech campus, a series of industrial buildings facing a
shared quadrangle of matted grass, with some concrete sidewalks laid
across it. The whole thing looked a bit like a college campus, I
suppose, if the college’s buildings had been designed to look like some
kind of sci-fi bubble city. Through the windows one could spy huge
machines with many levers dials and large vats that stuff was being
oozed into and out of.

People entered and exited the buildings in a hurried manner, and one
scientist, a frazzled-looking man with a redhead’s beard and an orange
t-shirt reading “got juice?”, crossed the path in front of us.

“Excuse me,” said the man in the vest, his manly striding posture
suddenly becoming bowed and deferential before the frazzled scientist.
“I found these people who got lost wandering around the campus,” he
explained, as if it was a question. “Do you think you could try to get
them home?”

“Oh, sure!” said the scientist, genial and alive as a carnival barker,
as if he made a habit of wandering around the Genentech campus at 2 in
the morning looking for people to take back to their cars.

“Thanks so much,” said the man in the vest, before scurrying back to his
go-kart.

The scientist reached for a walkie-talkie from his back pocket.
“Security, are you there? Security?” he said and paused. The radio
crackled. “This is security,” it finally replied. “Where are you?” he
asked. There was a pause. Then a crackle. “What?”

“Are you in your office?” Pause, crackle. “Um, yeah.”

“OK, be there in a bit.”

And that was how a Genentech scientist badged us into the facility and
begun taking us through its corridors.

“So what do you do here?” I asked, as if making conversation.

“Oh, we, um, make drugs to treat breast cancer,” he explained.

“Yeah, right,” my journalist whispered in my ear. “Awful big facility
just for treating breast cancer.”

“What do you do?” I asked. “Oh, I’m a scientist here.”

“Oh, really? A scientist? Heh, I always imagined scientists wandering
around in big white labcoats carrying beakers,” I joked. “Oh, we do,” he
said with utter sincerity. “Actually, I just took my lab coat off — if
you guys had been here a couple minutes earlier I would have been
wearing it.”

We wandered past hallways labeled with Genentech propaganda and stopped
right before the company cafeteria, ducking into a door to find the desk
for security.

“Hey there!” said the scientist. “Hi,” said the bored-looking
African-American woman behind the desk.

“Um, these two folks got a bit lost wandering around the neighborhood
and I was wondering you could help get them out of here.”

The security woman’s eyes widened. “What?” she shouted. “You brought
random strangers in here? They can’t be in here! You can’t just bring
people in here!”

“Well, I just figured I ought to take them to security and you guys
could help them out.”

“Help them out? Help them out? I’m not allowed to leave this desk,” she
cried. “Oh, they can’t be in here. You gotta get rid of these guys.”

“Oh, okay,” said the scientist, completely unfazed. “Well, I’ll walk
them back to their car.”

“Yeah, whatever,” she said dismissively. “You just do what you gotta do,
‘cause they can’t be in here.”

And that was how a Genentech scientist took us through the building,
past offices, through the loading dock, out the back past more
industrial equipment, a running commentary all the way.

“How’d you guys get in here?” asked the guard at the gate as we walked
past him. He’d obviously heard about us. “Oh,” my journalist said, “it
was open. We just walked in.” The guard just laughed and waved.

The scientist asked where we were from, just in the spirit of making
conversation. My journalist explained that we were from San Francisco
and we’d decided it was a nice night for a casual stroll, so we had been
walking around Vacaville. The scientist nodded approvingly, as if he
always ran into cityfolk who came out for a stroll around Vacaville’s
office parks at 2 in the morning.

Soon we’d located our car and said our goodbyes. The scientist waved
goodbye at us and we tried to stifle our giggles until we got back to
the car.

At moments like these, which seem to stand outside of space and time —
middle of nowhere, middle of the night — one thing remains constant:
Denny’s. Always open, with decor that hasn’t changed since its founding
in the 1960s, a diner like Denny’s is a perfect place to go to make
sense of it all. But none of it makes any sense at all; there is nothing
to do but lay your head down on the table and puzzle at a world that is
more strange than you can possibly imagine.
