Newspeak™
=========

March 25, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newspeaktm)

* * * * *

It started way back in the eighties, with the Stay Free maxi-pads. At
least, that’s what they said on this TV documentary I saw once. How
could you tell people to protect their freedom when they thought you
were talking about feminine hygiene products? I mean, you still had the
words, of course, it wasn’t Orwellian or anything, they didn’t take away
the words, they just “added” new meanings to them. Particular kinds of
meanings. And who really wanted to use them after that? It made the
whole idea of freedom seem kind of dirty.

We don’t have freedom either, of course. Freedom lasted a little longer,
before finally dying out in the late nineties when the name was taken by
that pornography download software. I mean, try telling some guy in the
street you’re just trying to protect your freedom. I’ve tried! He laughs
and then he makes some sort of obscene sexual pantomime. Makes it kind
of hard to be an activist.

Activist took a little longer. Companies bought out the core concepts
before they moved to the little stuff like us activists. Activist was
what they called it when they privatized the sewer system in the late
2000s. “Activists are shit,” you used to hear the right-wingers say. Now
they don’t even need to say it — it’s in the dictionary.

So when I recruit kids I can’t tell them what they’d be. Saying they’d
be activists is straight out, obviously. But I can’t even tell them we
do protests. Protest is what they call it when you call AAA when your
car breaks down. Kids don’t want to go around fixing broken cars.
They’re not big on protests.

Liberty quickly became the leading brand of thong underwear. Control is
the \#2 online role-playing game. Rights are the new name for gift
certificates. Democracy is the kind of M&Ms where you get to pick the
color. (“Geez man, we all like chocolate, but you’re taking things a bit
too far,” is what the kids say when I tell them we need to fight to
protect democracy.)

It’s like a nightmare version of *Intelligence* (or, as it used to be
called, *Wheel of Fortune*). They bought up all my words.
