Announcing the Open Library
===========================

July 16, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/openlibrary)

* * * * *

Early this year, when I left my job at Wired Digital, I thought I could
look forward to months of lounging around San Francisco, reading books
on the beach and drinking fine champagne and eating *foie gras*. Then I
got a phone call. Brewster Kahle of the Internet Archive was thinking of
pursuing a project that I’d been trying to do literally for years. I
thought long and hard about it and realized I couldn’t pass this
opportunity up. So I put aside my dreams of lavish living and once again
threw myself into my work. Just as well, I suppose, since San
Francisco’s beaches are freezing cold, champagne has a disgusting taste,
and *foie gras* is even worse.

I thought of the smartest programmers and designers I knew and gave them
a ring, sat down for coffee with them, threatened to fly out to their
homes and knock on their doors. In the end, we got together an amazing
group of people — all sworn to secrecy of course — and in the past few
months we’ve put together what’s probably the biggest project I ever
worked on.

So today I’m extraordinarily proud to announce [the Open
Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about) project. Our goal is to
build the world’s greatest library, then put it up on the Internet free
for all to use and edit. Books are the place you go when you have
something you want to share with the world — our planet’s cultural
legacy. And never has there been a bigger attempt to bring them all
together.

I hope you’ll take a look and let me know what you think. And if this
project excites you the way it excites me, I hope you’ll join us.

-   [Visit the Open Library site](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about)

