iz r childrens lrnng?
=====================

October 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverlearning)

* * * * *

*[High School Confidential](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743283635)*\
 by Jeremy Iversen\
 Atria, 464 pp., \$25.00

*[My Freshman Year: What a Professor Learned by Becoming a
Student](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0143037471)*\
 by Rebekah Nathan\
 Penguin, 208 pp., \$14.00 (paper reprint)

Some of our most formative years are spent in schools, odd places whose
ostensible goal is adult-directed education but in reality are
controlled by student-culture peer groups of which adults have little
actual understanding. Adults run examinations and programs, try to be
“hip” to teen culture, but ultimately, we must admit, we have little
idea what really goes on, making it easy for rumors to run wild.

Jeremy Iversen and Rebekah Nathan decided to see for themselves what
school life was really like, by going undercover and experiencing it
themselves. While they went to different places, in different guises, in
entirely different situations (Iversen was a senior in high school,
while Nathan was a freshman in college), the pictures they draw are
startlingly similar: a world where genuine education is absolutely the
last thing on everyone’s mind.

* * * * *

Jeremy Iversen grew up in New York, attended a prestigious boarding
school, and went to college at Stanford. But, he says, life after school
didn’t have the same appeal. So he decided to go back and get the
typical high school education he never had. The result — *High School
Confidential* — is a gripping memoir of what life is actually like for
the cool kids in a southern California high school.

The general outlines are perhaps less than shocking to those who have
been paying attention. High school kids routinely have casual sex with
each other, for example. (“There’s nothing else to do in this town,” one
student comments, “except start drama with everybody.”) They take drugs
— marijuana, cocaine, ecstasy, speed — right under their parents noses.
(In one scene, Travis, the class’s drug dealer, and Alexis, his sister,
are confronted by their father. “I’m going to give you a drug test,” he
warns them. “But I’ve been clean since nursery!” Travis replies. “Oh,
it’s only your sister I’m worried about,” explains the father.) The kids
cheat, not just by copying on tests, but by taking copious steroids and
human growth hormone to compete in sports. (“I read an article about
high school steroid use in *Sports Illustrated*”, comments the team
coach, as the kids who are using look away. “Good thing that’s not a
problem in our school.”)

Despite living in a very diverse community, many of the kids are full of
casual racism and right-wing politics (white people need to stand up for
their heritage, nuke all the Arabs), although they’re far more liberal
in practice (doing drugs with their Middle Eastern friends). When they
get mad at each other, they aren’t afraid to take it out in violent
brawls. And when the school throws parties, everybody gets totally
hammered. (There’s a brilliant scene where some kids throw up on Richard
Nixon’s grave.)

However, the novel is gripping in its details, with more amusing
characters and fascinating stories than any television show imitation of
high school life. The teachers are such characters that were this
fiction you might accuse them of being overwritten. School events are so
lavish (a band performs every day at lunch, large coordinated
dance-and-light shows are done for spirit rallies) that they seem like
TV exaggerations. School assignments are so inane (cut apart this cat)
that you might think the kid telling you this was exaggerating. But
Iversen was there, the dialogue in the book is copied down verbatim, the
description of events was taken first-hand.^[1](#fn:1)^

And, indeed, the most shocking components are not the tales of the kids,
but of the schools. Iversen draws a picture of an institution that is
not just failing at learning, but antithetical to it. Thea, the only
girl in the book with any academic passion, is routinely discouraged by
the actions of both peers and adults. But no other student even gets
that far. The school’s student culture makes caring about class
unthinkable; the school’s classes make learning near-impossible.

But the grandest component of Iversen’s tale is how he dismantles our
previous methods for trying to understand how schools operate. First,
there is Derrick, the school board’s secret weapon. Derrick is an
articulate and popular student, admired by all, and elected class
president. But it slowly becomes clear that student government,
including him, is nothing but the administration’s pawn. The regulations
are designed to make genuine complaints impossible to bring before the
administration, while the administration uses Derrick at every
opportunity as a mouthpiece for their lies about what the children
really think. Thus the only student representative most outside adults
see is no representative at all.

Then there are the standards regulations, around which the curriculum is
supposedly organized. The state school accreditation team is coming to
verify that it is, and the adults worry that they’re quite likely to
fail. So the principal goes all-out, bribing, threatening, and faking
the school into appearing good. Any kid who ever caused a problem is
locked away in a hidden trailer for the duration of the inspector’s
visit, every class is replaced with fake, scripted, standards-compliant
material. Every child puts on fake happy faces under severe duress. And
the school passes with flying colors. “I wish every kid in the state
could have an education this good”, insists the lead inspector.

The reality is that between adult and student, there is a vast gulf in
mentality. Iversen’s genius is that he can get us inside the heads of
both sides.

* * * * *

Around the same time, Rebekah Nathan, an anthropology professor at AnyU
(both psuedonyms), was sitting in on some classes herself. She noticed
that simply by acting like a student — sitting in class, taking notes,
etc. — her fellow students began treating her like one, sharing gossip
and trading facts she never got to see as a professor. Eager to cross
that same mental gulf, she decided to spend her sabbatical the following
year doing an undercover anthropological study of her own university.

Nathan enrolled as a freshman, lived in a dorm, and took a full load of
courses. Despite looking like a mom, the other students accepted her as
their own. She probably couldn’t get involved in the party scene and
didn’t try — she stuck to studying the academic and intellectual side of
college life — but pretty much everything she says fits with my
impressions as a freshman Stanford student around the same time and I
can even confirm a couple of her more surprising specific points.

After confining her focus to the intellectual, Nathan discovers that
there simply isn’t much there. Students have their own culture with
regard to class, a language known as “Undergraduate Cynical”, where
actually caring about the material is deeply frowned upon, and the only
questions you’re permitted to ask of a teacher are about the details of
grading and assignments:

> A good question, I learned, is one that voices a concern shared by
> other students or that asks for clarifications of upcoming work. “Will
> there be more questions on the test from the text or the lecture?”
> “Should the paper be double- or single- spaced?” […]
>
> […] “What does that mean?” is, incredibly, just not the kind of
> question that an American college student would ask.

This isn’t just show; students genuinely aren’t engaged in classes. They
don’t do the required reading, they dash off assignments, they ditch
classes, they cheat on tests. Some go up and talk to the teacher about
things, but they do so with ulterior motives in mind. Signs and talks
geared to incoming students explain that one must “work the teachers” by
talking to them, getting them to recognize you so they will give you
hints about tests and go easy on you when you need exceptions. “I take
the information I need from the professor”, one highly-successful
student tells Nathan, explaining what that consists of: “how they’re
going to grade you and what they think is important”. Everything is seen
as part of the game, not worthwhile for its own sake.

But it’s all too easy to lament this sad state of student affairs,
perhaps complain about the laziness of modern students. But Nathan goes
one step further: she shows *why* it is happening. For even she, a
professor with a Ph.D, finds herself doing the exact same things. “We
don’t need to study those things, they won’t be on the test”, she tells
her study partner Rob. It takes Rob, a fellow student, to ask her
whether she just cares about learning for its own sake.

The culture of Undergraduate Cynical, you see, is not created by student
laziness or a lack of concern for intellectual life. It’s created by the
necessities of the schedule. Students simply don’t have time to care.
They take three to five classes, each with separate sections and lab
assignments, each with its own schedule of papers and readings and
adults to suck up to. That alone is enough to drive Rebekah crazy,
despite her thinking she had pretty good time management skills juggling
all her commitments as a professor. But on top of that most students go
to activities and clubs, work an on- or off-campus job, party in the
evenings, and try to maintain relationships. When you run the math,
there just isn’t enough time to care.

So students instead focus on doing what’s required of them: just
scraping by. Anything that won’t impact their grade much is tossed and a
desire to learn becomes a desire to pass. It’s hard to imagine any
sincere desire to learn surviving such a harried schedule. As soon as
you get engrossed or a book or topic, you have to dash off to your next
meeting.

Again, this is all something completely invisible to the professors.
They spend their days worrying about tomorrow’s lecture and are shocked
when students don’t do the same. But the students haven’t had time:
they’ve had two more classes and who knows how many assignments in the
interim. And, anyway, they only picked this course because it filled a
convenient hole in their schedule, they’re not even sure what it’s
about.

So the students simply don’t get engrossed, student discussion groups
don’t actually discuss things, but instead each student simply makes up
a point of view and shares it so they don’t get a zero on their in-class
participation grade. There is no “meeting of the minds” on any subject;
there are hardly any minds.

* * * * *

Both books, their research being conducted undercover, will no doubt
lead some to raise ethical questions. Jeremy Iversen had to deceive and
mislead his fellow students — including creating a fake backstory — in
order to experience life with them. Rebekah Nathan, while not explicitly
lying, led students to believe she was just an older woman going back to
school, and certainly not one of their professors.

But deception alone is not an ethical violation. Psychology studies
routinely deceive subjects into thinking the experiment is about X, when
actually it is about Y. (I myself have been so deceived.) The key
difference, and in my opinion the only possible ethical lapse on Iversen
and Nathan’s part, is that after the study is over, the psychologists
explain what was really going on. Neither Nathan nor Iversen told their
friends afterwards, leaving them only to discover it after the project
had gone public.

(By contrast, Barbara Ehrenreich, in *Nickeled and Dimed*, her study of
low-wage work, told her fellow workers at the end that she was working
on a book about the experience. They were “remarkably blasé” about it,
she found.)

But more generally, important scientific projects like these might have
to step on a few ethical toes. Some of the greatest experiments in
psychology — the Milgram experiments on obedience to authority and
Zimbardo’s Stanford Prison Experiment — were easy fodder for armchair
ethicists. But while people may have their feelings ruffled, in all of
these experiments there was little lasting hurt to the participants,
while the educational consequences of the studies themselves have been
immense.

* * * * *

The real ethical question is how we can justify forcing our children
into such institutions of anti-intellectualism. Iversen found that high
school students were quite conservative politically, even more so than
their parents, and perhaps it’s not surprising that Bush’s
anti-intellectual charm appeals to kids who daily experience education
as a form of torture.

Perhaps students learn something by going through the necessary motions
required to get a degree, but I defy anyone to read both of these
accounts and continue to insist that schools are teaching kids to be
“critical thinkers” with a “life-long love of learning”. If anything,
the real education is in the opposite.

Instead of critical thinkers, we have kids willing to accept any
requirement, no matter how absurd, without question. “If you write what
you want to that prof,” explains a successful senior, “you’re gonna end
up with a bad grade. Whereas, if you write to *them*, you win—you can
still have your own mindset and say, hell, I know this isn’t the way I
feel, but I’ll give them what they want.” But, as experiments in
cognitive dissonance have shown us, if one continues saying what one
doesn’t feel, one begins feeling it before too long. It’s easy to see
how this is effective training for professionalism, which actually means
doing what you’re told, despite what you believe. But it’s hard to see
how this system is going to generate students who will buck a trend.

Instead of life-long learners, we have kids who learn that genuine
learning is a joke. “Education” becomes that stupid thing in classrooms
that you have to do to get a decent job, an entirely mercenary
perspective that’s unhelpfully encouraged by the mercenary pressures of
student loans. If the only education you’ve ever experienced is doing
what’s necessary to get a good grade, why would you do it when the
grades weren’t around?

Our public high schools were supposed to make every child a good citizen
of the democracy. Our great universities were supposed to show young
people our grandest achievements. One could say that these institutions
are failing at their jobs, but it might be more accurate to say that
they’re being all too successful.

**Notes**

* * * * *

1.  Some of the more verbal students at the school, upset at being
    hoodwinked by an undercover writer and disappointed at their
    portrayal, have taken to posting nasty comments on web sites and in
    the school paper suggesting that Iversen’s book is fictionalized.
    But, as far as I can see, everything they claim that he left out, he
    actually included (with a single exception: one person on the
    Internet claimed kids called him “Plasticface”) and they have failed
    to dispute any details he included. So, while no doubt Iversen’s
    book contains errors (every book does, especially one as difficult
    to write as this), I’m compelled to believe it is largely
    accurate. [↩](#fnref:1)



[image1_undercoverlearning]: image1_undercoverlearning.jpg
[image2_undercoverlearning]: image2_undercoverlearning.jpg