Seven Habits of Highly Successful Websites
==========================================

December 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sevenhabits)

* * * * *

I got a phone call from my father the other day. “Oh,” I thought
immediately, “he’s probably calling to finally apologize for failing to
attend that basketball game I played at in fourth grade.” But no, I was
once again wrong. He was calling to pitch his web startup.

They’re at the racquetball court, the grocery store, the venture
capitalists’ offices — you can’t avoid this new crowd of so-called “Web
2.0” startups. And every time they meet you, if they’re not asking for
angel funding, they’re asking for suggestions on how they should run
their company.

For a long time, I’d simply tell them they should ask a real expert,
like Dr. Paulson Graham of the Institute of Advances Startup Studies,
but the number of queries has become so great that I’ve decided to
conduct some research of my own.

I picked out seven recent extremely popular websites. While perhaps not
having the mindshare of a “Basecamp” or a “Ning”, these websites do have
the benefit of having tons of actual users. Here they are, ranked
roughly in order of popularity:

-   MySpace
-   Wikipedia (basically tied)
-   Facebook
-   Flickr (pronounced flick-her)
-   Digg
-   Del.icio.us (pronounced dell-dot-icky-oh-dot-you-ess)
-   Google Maps (no popularity data available but I bet it’s pretty
    popular)

I looked at all these websites to see what they have in common. Here’s
what I discovered.

Be Ugly
-------

With the single exception of Flickr, all these websites are hideous.
Facebook and Wikipedia redesigned late in the game, upgrading their web
design from “hideous” to “barely tolerable”, but MySpace has continued
on, its name becoming synonymous with design so atrocious it has
actually been known to induce vomiting in epileptic Japanese children.
Not surprisingly, it’s the most popular site on the list.

Unlike most of Google, Google Maps actually isn’t such a bad looking
website in itself, but most of its Web 2.0 “cred” comes from its ability
to make “mashups” in which people stick a Google Map with several
hundred thousand different little red blurble icons sticking all over it
onto a webpage whose design sense can best be described as “MySpace
knockoff”. Normally I don’t go in for guilt by association, but in this
case I think it’s deserved.

Del.icio.us and Digg both attempted redesigns at one point but due to a
tragic mixup in communication, the web design teams they hired misheard
their instructions and thought their job was actually to try to make the
site look *worse* instead of better. Having blown several thousand
dollars of their VC’s money on this enterprise, they had no choice but
to launch the resulting look.

Don’t Have Features
-------------------

Let’s start with MySpace. Again, just as it’s a leader in traffic, it’s
a leader in this category. MySpace has so few features, I don’t even
know what it does. Neither, apparently, do its users, who in fact create
MySpace accounts simply to impress their friends and annoy their
teachers. (Personal communication)

The last time Wikipedia added a substantive new feature was the addition
of categories a couple years ago and, frankly, that was a pretty bad
idea because it was so poorly implemented. Otherwise it’s basically just
been a big box you edit text in with a bunch of kluges on top. That’s
how it got to be number two.

Facebook, Flickr, and Digg all add features occasionally, but they’re
more than counteracted by Del.icio.us and Google Maps, which in fact
have actively taken features away. Del.icio.us decided that tag
intersections (finding links that are tagged with two words) was just
too hard to get back online after they were purchased by Yahoo! and so
they simply took the feature down without notice. The site spiked in
popularity until they added them back the other day and traffic went
down once again.

Google Maps, meanwhile, has just removed everything else from the page
except for the map and the search box, ensuring no features get in
between the user and their mapping experience. Like most Google
software, though, features are definitely not going to be *added*.

Let Users Do Your Job
---------------------

None of the content on any of these sites is provided by the people who
made the site. In every case, the content is provided by the users. The
only exception is Google Maps, where the content is provided NAVTEQ.

Combined with the last principle, you might begin to suspect that this
is simply because the developers of these sites are extremely lazy. But
I don’t believe that; I think there’s a more complicated principle at
work.

I believe in a theory I’ll call “The Stupidity of Crowds”. Here’s the
basic idea: if just one person or a small group of people builds a
website, they have to be at least moderately intelligent. Buying servers
and writing programs is somewhat hard and takes a little bit of
brainpower. This means that the content for their site will be similarly
intelligent and thus it won’t be of interest to the vast majority of
Internet users.

The glorious thing about the Internet, however, is that it allows us to
aggregate the combined stupidity of literally *millions* of people. No
longer do you have to try to play towards the lowest common denominator
— now you can actually have the lowest common denominator build your
site for you. No single mortal could possibly come up with the content
you find on the average MySpace, let alone the hideous color scheme,
garish backgrounds, and awful auto-playing background music. No,
something like that takes The Stupidity of Crowds.

Ignore Standards
----------------

Like 99.999999% of all websites on the Internet, none of these websites
supports web standards, the documents that explain the proper way to use
the Web. Enough said.

Build to Flip
-------------

MySpace, Flickr, Del.icio.us, and Google Maps all sold out to larger
companies. (Google Maps didn’t even launch until after it was acquired.)
Wikipedia is apparently some sort bizarre legal construction called a
“donation-funded non-profit” and this apparently has made it hard to
sell. (Note to future founders: make sure not to incorporate your
company as one of these as it can severely hamper your options later
on.)

Facebook and Digg haven’t sold out yet, but I bet they want to. (Another
tip: taking large quantities of VC money also makes it hard to sell your
company, both because it gives you a swelled head but also because it
gives the VCs control over when you can sell, and their heads are
*really* big.)
