Competition of Experimentation?
===============================

December 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/compvexp)

* * * * *

It should be clear to anyone who has studied the topic that the way to
drive innovation forward is to have lots of small groups of people each
trying different things to succeed. In *Guns, Germs, and Steel*, for
example, we see that certain societies succeed because geography breaks
them up into chunks and prevents any one person with bad ideas from
getting control of too much, while other societies fail because their
whole territory can too easily be captured by an idiot.

It might at first seem more efficient to let the whole territory be
captured by a genius, but a moment’s reflection will show that there are
few geniuses whose brainpower can match the combined results of many
independent experiments. This has [fairly obvious applications to
business](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googradient) and other fields,
but for a moment let’s just think about the concept itself.

This idea is often presented as a defense of competition and the
capitalist market system that embraces it. Innovation only happens, such
people say, when lots of people are competing against each other for the
prizes of success. In a communist country, where Big State decides what
will be worked on and how, there is no incentive to innovate. Only in a
country like ours, where the victor gets the spoils, can new technology
be developed.

And yet we also know that competition is a terrible way to get people do
well. In *No Contest: The Case Against Competition* (now out in [an
elegant 20th anniversary
edition](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0395631254)) we see dozens of
studies that show that, by all sorts of metrics, people’s performance
(and enjoyment) goes down when they are forced to compete. Even worse,
it goes down most notably for creative tasks — precisely the kind of
thing involved in innovation.

How do we resolve the contradiction? The key is to notice that
competition, especially market competition, isn’t the only way to
encourage experimentation. And that’s often hard to do, because
typically market competition is treated as the only sensible form of
competition and competition as the only sensible form of
experimentation. But that’s not at all the case.

Instead of providing a prize for winner, we could provide rewards to
everyone who tries. And that actually makes sense — not only because
[prizes also decrease productivity and
creativity](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618001816) — but also because,
when it comes to experimentation, it’s not really your fault if the
experiment doesn’t work. In fact, we want to encourage people to try
crazy things that might not work, which is exactly why rewards are so
counterproductive.

But even if you don’t give an explicit prize, competition is still
unhealthy. Contrary to what the apologists for market theology would
like you to believe, people do not work better when they’re terrified of
the guy next to them finding the solution first. Which is why we should
look at this as simply experimentation, not competition.

Experimentation can certainly be carried out cooperatively. Imagine many
different scientists in a lab, each trying different ideas during the
day, swapping notes and tips over lunch, perhaps joining together to
form small groups for certain experiments, or perhaps helping with
little pieces of other projects in which they have particular expertise.
Each scientist may disagree on which is the right direction to pursue,
but that doesn’t make them enemies.

That’s the way that science progresses. And, if you let it, other things
too.
