---
layout: post
title:  "Stanford: Season Finale"
date:   2005/06/04 00:00
---

Original: [Stanford: Season Finale](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/season1finale)

----------

<!--
June 3
-->
6月3日

<!--
Nobody likes being called to the principal’s office. Even in high school
when the principal was “cool” — I’d tell him school was harmful and
should be abolished, he’d agree, and we’d talk about it — it still felt
wrong. And it always felt worse when, as surprisingly often was the
case, the powerful man in the big chair talked about how powerful you,
the puny little pushed-around student, were.
-->
校長室に呼び出されて喜ぶ奴なんていない。高校の校長がいい人だったとしても(実際、学校はひどい、なくなるべきだ、なんて話せば校長は同意してくれたし、そんな愚痴に乗ってくれたりもした)、やはり呼び出しはつらい。そして、驚くほどそうなることが多いのだけど、権威の象徴とも言える校長が日常にげんなりしている生徒に対して「君はなんでもできるんだ」などと力説したりすると、もう辛くて仕方なくなる。

<!--
I remember the time in 7th grade that the teacher told me to leave the
room and fill out one of his “dispute resolution forms” — his method of
classroom discipline. I resisted by filling out the form in an absurd
manner, because the whole thing was just so degrading. Then the teacher
complained that *I* was being condescending! (A few years later, after
the 7th grade teacher had moved out to a cabin in the Pacific Northwest
with my 6th grade teacher, he came back to school and seemed much
cooler, so I don’t think it was really his fault.)
-->
中1のころ、教室を出て「トラブル解決用紙」に記入するよう先生から言われていたことを思い出す。それは、クラスに秩序をもたらす彼なりのやり方だった。そのやり方を恥ずべき行為だと感じていたので、反抗の意を示すべく無茶苦茶なことを書いて提出した。そしたら、先生に「*君*は人を見下してるのか！」と叱られた。(数年後、彼は、僕の6年生のときの担任と一緒に北アメリカ大陸北西部の山小屋に引っ越した。その後復職した際、彼は冷静さを取り戻したようにみえたので、ひょっとしたら諸々の原因は彼以外にあったのかもしれない。)

<!--
*You sure weren’t rich, didn’t live in the city
 Didn’t whisper sweet nothings, never told me I’m pretty*
-->
*あなたにはお金もなく、都会ぐらしでもなかった
 優しい言葉をかけてくれたこともなく、カワイイとすら言ってくれなかった*
 (訳注：Mono Puff の Don't I Have The Right? という曲の冒頭部分)

<!--
All this by way of saying I received a rather discomfitting feeling when
[unnamed authority figure] sent me a cryptic note saying she wanted me
to come see her. I asked her about what but she never replied. (She
later explained that she meant to but it just got behind.)
-->

Worried, I asked a few people about what [unnamed authority figure] did.
“Have you committed any crimes recently?” asked one. “Not that I know
of,” I said. “Maybe I kill people in my sleep?” But how do I dispose of
the bodies? The lake’s already run dry! Another, always optimistic,
insisted it must be a good thing. “They wouldn’t have her deliver bad
news. It can only be good.” I wasn’t buying it.

As I walked to the meeting, there was a different disposition. I heard a
girl screaming her lungs out and then slapping her boyfriend, who had
apparently cheated on her. The boyfriend was desperately penitent,
insisting it was just an accident, not a pattern, and that he loved her.

*You cheated at cards, and lied when you hung out\
 in bars making time with those girls you called old pals*

None of this eased my discomfort, nor did the fact that I had a major
assignment due in a couple hours. 90% of my grade in one class depended
on what work I turned in today by 5pm and I hadn’t really started on it.
I tried to do it last night but I couldn’t bring myself to do it until I
was too tired to make any progress. I wasn’t sure I’d have any better
luck this morning.

When I finally saw [unnamed authority figure] she was so happy that I
couldn’t stop myself from smiling. Maybe she was right — maybe it was
good news. Then we sat down. “I wanted to talk to you about some of your
behavior,” she began. Oh, this wasn’t going to be good.

*I cried when you left me,\
 now I’m wondering when you’ll make it all up to me?*

She said she’d been tipped off by my IHUM TF(訳注：http://www.stanforddaily.com/2012/03/09/farewell-to-ihum/), which was odd, since we’d
just had a long talk a week ago or so and I thought we’d worked
everything out. Not that there really was a whole lot to work out.
Actually, that talk probably just made it worse.

But then she’d done her own research and begun telling me what she’d
uncovered:

-   She’d pulled my admissions applications and saw that I was really
    self-schooled, meaning I was probably “a bit more isolated or
    sheltered from your peers than might be typical.”

-   She checked with the Residence Dean at my dorm and found [I was too
    shy to ask someone for help moving a filing
    cabinet](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001421).

-   She also heard (amazingly) that I’d [written some hurtful
    things](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001641) about a “young woman I
    was dating”.

-   The TF had said that I once blurted something out in class, which I
    don’t really remember specifically but certainly seems plausible.

-   The TF also claimed that once I had jumped out at her and said boo.

-   The TF also said that I’d once said she went to a lower-class school
    and suggested I was trying to call her authority into question.

“It paints an interesting picture for me,” she said. I laughed to
myself. “Heh, it’s just like one of those television season finales, you
know, where the main characters get called before an authority figure
who then proceeds to list everything they’ve done over the season, only
it’s all a little off and a little out-of-context.” Like that *Seinfeld*
finale, where everyone they’d ever met started to testify against them.
(See how I self-consciously point out the clichés I’m in? Let it never
be said that this blog is not post-modern!)

It certainly was an interesting picture. I was beginning to sound sort
of autistic or something. “I feel like I’ve made a couple mistakes,” I
said, “but doesn’t everyone? The difference is that mine are just a
little more public and mine are the ones being scrutinized.” If reality
TV has taught us anything, it’s that you can find something in anything,
if you look hard enough.

*[Don’t I have the
right](http://www.tmbw.net/wiki/index.php/Don%27t_I_Have_The_Right) to
be over you yet?\
 I’ve tried pretending. I tried to forget.*

We kept talking — for a half-hour altogether — but every time I tried to
tell her about myself it just kept sounding worse. The facts were all
able to fit the frame.

“Well, what suggestions do you have?” I finally asked. “One strange
thing about me is that I love hearing negative things about myself.”
“You do?” she replied. “Yeah, I guess most people, when they receive
nasty letters, they feel bad or something. But I love them — the nastier
the better. the ones that are all obscentities just make my day.”

“Why?” she asked. “I don’t know,” I said and thought about it. “There’s
this theory,” I said, “that’s very popular in our society that people
have certain specific attributes, like personality traits. So some
people are smart and other people are funny and that’s just how it is.

“I don’t believe that. I think people are malleable. I think I’m
malleable. So whe I hear something negative, I don’t think ‘oh no, I’m a
bad person’, I think ‘well, that’s something I can work on.’” She didn’t
seem convinced.

Well, she didn’t want to punish me or anything, she said, and she didn’t
know me well enough to give any specific advice, but she suggested I
talk to my friends (I tried to persuade her that I had some) and ask
them about my “outbursts” and “empathy”.

*Though it’s past three AM, I would still let you in\
 ‘cause I can’t go on dreaming alone.*

* * * * *

I couldn’t find anything to take to lunch to read, which is generally a
sign I’ll find someone to talk to. And sure enough I found one of those
friends and sat down. “Do you think I have problems with empathy?” I
asked him. “Uhhh, I don’t know,” he said. “Why?” I told him the story.
“Heh, that’s pretty funny,” he said. “You got called to the principal’s
office for hurting someone’s feelings.”

Afterwards, when my friend has left and I’m all alone, a hand grabs my
shoulder. I spin around but I don’t recognize its owner. “Hey, Schwartz,
I’m really sorry you didn’t win evil dictator last night,” he says.
“Uh-huh,” I mumble. “I voted for you,” he says. “Oh. Thank you,” I say
and walk away. After a few seconds I realize what he’s referring to —
the dorm passed out surveys for things like “funniest guy” and so on and
announced the results in a *Family Feud*-style gameshow last night.
Maybe I have more friends than I think.

心配になったので、その「某関係者」がどういう人なのか周りに聞いてみた。「最近なんか法に触れるようなことした？」と尋ねられたので、「いや、思い当たる節はないけど。」と答えた。「ひょっとして、夢遊病で夜な夜な人を殺してまわってるのか？」いや、だとしたらどうやって死体を処理してる？湖はもう干上がっちゃってるし！もう一人、いつもポジティブなやつは、絶対いい話だよと主張した。「わざわざ彼女に悪い話を伝えさせないでしょ。いい話以外ありえないよ。」と。真に受けてはいなかったけど。

話し合いの場に出向いてみると、there was a different disposition. 女の子が大声で叫んでいるのが聞こえてきたかと思えば、彼女は付き合ってる男性を平手打ちしていた。どうも、その男性は彼女を騙していたっぽい。そいつはそれをすごく後悔してる様子だった。事故だったんだよ、いつものことじゃないんだ、君のことが大好きだよと訴えた。
