When Brute Force Fails
======================

October 18, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bruteforce)

* * * * *

Liberals don’t like talking about crime. The classic answer—fixing the
root causes of crime—now seems hopelessly ambitious. And our natural
sympathy for the millions ground down by an out-of-control prison system
and a pointless war on drugs doesn’t play well with voters, especially
when most criminals can’t vote. The general belief seems to be that the
problem of crime has been solved—after all, crime levels have dropped
dramatically since the law-and-order 80s—and that the real problem now
is not too much crime, but too much punishment. If voters don’t agree,
it’s because TV news continues to obsess over violent crime even as
actual occurrences of it have cratered, leaving behind a population who
wants to do even more to crack down on an army of bad guys who don’t
really exist. The smartest liberal position on crime seems to be
changing the subject and talking about white-collar crime instead
(which, as recent economic news has made clear, is a real epidemic).

Mark Kleiman, in his brilliant new book, *When Brute Force Fails*, takes
a different view. Crime, aside from drug crimes (where his work
persuasively argues that “the abuse of illicit drugs is a human tragedy
but not a major threat to the social order”), is serious. (Presumably
this only applies to classic violent crimes; it’s obvious this logic
doesn’t work for violations of copyright law and civil disobedience.)
Even where there’s a small amount of actual crime, it’s possible that’s
just because people are wasting so much time preventing it. There’s a
serious social cost to having to remember to lock our doors and carry
our keys around all the time, let alone the money we waste on burglar
alarms and car-tracking services and all the rest.

While I find the methodology he uses to show it wildly
problematic^[1](#fn:fn1)^, I agree with his point that crime really
sucks. Even if a burglar only causes \$400 worth of damage, I’d pay far
more than \$400 to prevent a burglary — the loss of privacy, the sense
of violation, the disruption of my normal order, the distraction of
having to deal with police and repairmen and insurance agents, etc. all
add up to make burglary a nightmare well above the direct economic
damage it causes.

Such things are a frustration for white suburbanites, but for poor
people stuck in the ghetto, they’re a nightmare. Crime is yet another
disadvantage and a particularly noxious one at that. Even aside from all
the other indignities suffered by the poor, just imagining life in a
crime-ridden neighborhood is enough to make your skin crawl.

But, Kleiman insists, we also have to count the harm to the criminals!
Going through lengthy court proceedings, spending years in abusive
prisons, having to deal with officious parole officers and the loss of
liberty they cause are all serious costs and we can’t wave them away
just because they happen to the bad guys. Law enforcement isn’t a
zero-sum game: both criminals and victims can benefit from less
punishment.^[2](#fn:fnr)^

So there’s the question: How can we have less crime with less
punishment? The first thing to notice is that low-crime is an
equilibrium state: if nobody is committing any crimes, all anti-crime
resources can be focused on anyone who decides to break the law, making
it irrational for them to even try. But high-crime is also an
equilibrium (assuming reasonable levels of punishment): if everyone is
breaking the law, the police can’t possibly stop all of them, so it’s
not so risky to keep on breaking the law.

To reduce both crime and punishment, you just need to tip the society
from one equilibrium to the other. And, Kleiman argues, we can do that
with a technique he calls “dynamic concentration.” Imagine there are
three robbers (Alice, Bob, and Carol) and one policeman (Eve). Eve can
only stop one robber at a crime, so if more than one person is
committing a burglary at the same time, she decides to be fair and
switch around who she arrests — sometimes she nabs Alice, sometimes Bob,
sometimes Carol.

The problem is that the robbers know this and they know it means they
only have a 1/3 chance of getting caught. A guaranteed arrest is bad
news, but a 1/3 chance of getting arrested isn’t worth quitting over. So
the robbers keep on robbing and the cop keeps failing to keep up with
them.

But now imagine Eve adopts a new policy: dynamic concentration. Instead
of randomly deciding who to go after, she goes after people in
alphabetical order. So if Alice is committing a crime, Eve always goes
after her first if she’s committing a crime — otherwise Bob, and then
Carol. Now Alice knows that if she robs someone, she’s guaranteed to get
caught (instead of just having a one-third chance), so she decides to
sit this one out. You might think this would just lead Bob to step into
the breach, but now that Alice is out, Eve can turn her focus to Bob
instead. So Bob also decides to call it quits. That just leaves Carol,
who Eve now gets to watch like a hawk, and so Carol also gives up the
game. And there you have it: dynamic concentration stops all the crime
without adding any more police.

Obviously things aren’t so clean in the real world, but I think this is
the first game-theoretic argument I’ve read that seems to have some real
force. Kleiman backs it up with some messier simulations and some
real-life examples. Unfortunately, most are stories about cracking down
on drugs or other unserious crimes like squeegee men, but the general
point seems to work.

For twenty years, High Point, North Carolina had tried to fight the
crack dealing in the city’s African-American West End neighborhood. Any
viewer of *The Wire* can guess the results: as soon as they made a case
against one drug dealer, another would jump in to take his place. So
with the help of crime scholar David Kennedy, they tried a new approach.
First, they spent months building trust between the police and the
community to build consensus that the drug trade was something worth
stopping. Then they pushed extra resources into the neighborhood and
started putting together cases against the dealers — but didn’t make any
arrests. Only when they had a case against every known dealer did they
act.

Even then they didn’t make arrests. They visited the dealer’s homes with
a neighborhood leader, who told them that the neighborhood had decided
they had to go straight. Meanwhile a cop presented them with the legal
case against them. The pair asked the dealer to quit and offered
whatever services—tattoo removal, job training—would help them do that.
Ten of the thirteen dealers took them up on the offer, leaving plenty of
room for the justice system to lock up the remaining three, plus the one
new dealer who tried to take over their old business. Five years later,
the market is still closed, and the police have been able to direct
their resources to pull the same trick on the other drug markets. Crime
is down, and arrests are down too. Dynamic concentration works, with the
city’s different drug markets standing in for Alice, Carol, and Bob.
(The other examples—especially Hawaii’s HOPE program—are even more
interesting, but take longer to tell.)

Dynamic concentration isn’t a panacea. Obviously it only works where the
costs of monitoring are much less than the costs of enforcement. But
this still leaves lots of opportunities and clever selection of the
population to concentrate on can significantly decrease the cost of
monitoring.

While the big idea of dynamic concentration is at the center of the
book, it’s not one of those one-trick monographs where the author lays
out one good idea and then spends the rest of the book repeating it.
Instead, the book ranges over the whole theory and practice crime
control in America and nearly every page is filled with interesting
facts and a new perspective.

And in a brilliant final chapter, he turns his lens on himself and asks
what could go wrong with his proposals. For an intellectual, the level
of humility and self-criticism involved is truly impressive. (He
confesses to probably all of the complaints that you’re thinking about
raising right now.)

For anyone interested in policy analysis, this book should be a classic.
It shows how simple tools (calculating the scale of the problem,
modeling it with game theory, and calculating the costs of a solution)
can have radical implications.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691142084)

* * * * *

1.  Kleiman uses surveys asking people how much they would pay to
    achieve a ten percent reduction in a crime. Aside from all the usual
    problems with such willingness-to-pay metrics, this seems like a
    particularly meaningless question. I don’t have a good sense of what
    the crime rate is, let alone what a 10% decrease in it would look
    like. I can’t possibly assign a sensible monetary value to something
    so abstract. It’d be better to ask people what they’d pay to prevent
    one crime, assuming the crime rate is low enough that [Karelis-type
    effects](http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks/book.asp?isbn=9780300120905)
    don’t come into play. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Since a rational criminal would by definition be better off
    committing the crime, this mainly comes up in cases of information
    asymmetry. Unlike in playground games of Cops and Robbers, real
    police are better off warning the criminals away from doing crime
    than tricking them into doing it and then sneaking up and catching
    them. [↩](#fnref:fnr)


