Neurosis \#9
============

February 7, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/imposition)

* * * * *

So here I am. We’re somewhere over a dark patch in the middle of the
country and I’m in the window seat in the last row in the plane. The guy
in front of me’s leaning all the way back, but I’m in the last row so my
seat doesn’t go back, and I have to lift my legs up to stretch out a
muscle that was sitting funny while I was asleep. So here I sit,
scrunched up in the the last row of the plane, my thighs hugged against
my chest, my knees digging into the seat in front of me, my back curved
funny from being unable to recline. But that’s not the problem.

No, the problem is that I am terribly, almost unbearably, thirsty. My
mouth has been dry for hours, we’re long past that. Now I’m so thirsty
that the color has drained from my face, because there simply is no
fluid left to keep it there. I am so thirsty that it’s beginning to feel
like there’s no water around to hydrate my brain so my neocortex is
getting and shrivelling up. It’s an odd feeling, your brain shriveling
up. It makes it hard to think. But I guess that’s not really the problem
either.

The problem, the real problem I suppose, is that I can’t ask for
anything to drink. I am perfectly justified — I was asleep during the
drink service, I am quite terribly thirsty, my flight is unusually
uncomfortable to begin with — yet I cannot bring myself to do it. As the
flight attendants walk briskly by, I fail to catch their eyes. And the a
man sitting in the seat next to me on the aisle has headphones on, so I
can’t exactly interrupt him. I could ring my flight attendant call
button, but I’ve never quite been able to bring myself to do that. I’m
so close to the flight attendants anyway.

If I rang the call button, I tell myself, I wouldn’t ask for a Sprite.
I’d just ask for water. Asking for a Sprite, it’d seem like I was
interrupting them just so I could get my soda fix. Like I was some sort
of petulant child who had to have his soda and was going to throw a
temper tantrum if they didn’t get it. Like a troublemaker, the kind of
person they look down on. But water? Water they’d understand: it was a
genuine medical request, a normal, physical human need. Something
totally worth taking the extraordinary step of pressing the flight
attendant call button.

But I can’t bring myself to do it. It seems like such an imposition.

This, I suppose, is the actual problem: I feel my existence is an
imposition on the planet. Not a huge one, perhaps, not a huge one at
all, but an imposition nonetheless. When I go to a library and I see the
librarian at her desk reading, I’m afraid to interrupt her, even though
she sits there specifically so that she may be interrupted, even though
being interrupted by for reasons like this by people like me is her very
job. At the fast food restaurant, I feel embarrassed taking time to pick
through my pocket for appropriate change, so I always give them whole
bills, then feel embarrassed when they have to take the time to count
*me* out change. When someone asks me what high school I’m going to, I
feel awkward explaining to them that I’ve gone to high school and to
college and then started a company and sold it, so I just stutter a bit
and then tell them that my high school is outside of Chicago.

I realize this is neurotic. Maybe not the high school thing, maybe
that’s just politeness, but certainly the thing right now, the brain
shriveling with the knees digging and yet still the fear of asking for
some water. “This is neurotic, Aaron,” I say to myself. “You are being
neurotic. It is not normal to be this shy. And geez, certainly you of
all people have little justification for being so undemanding.”

I am a good person, I mean. I work hard, I happily pay my taxes, I think
of ways to make the world a better place, I always look the woman behind
the counter in the eye and say “thank you, thank you,” as if I really
mean it, as if I really do appreciate the effort it took for her punch
my order into her cash register and withdraw the right amount of change.
And I do! So I deserve this, I deserve my glass of water, my can of
soda. I am not like one of those people who goes around robbing banks
and mugging old ladies and then stands in front of me in the supermarket
line, throwing a tantrum about how dare the clerk not accept my credit
card. No, *I* am perfectly justified in asking for a glass of water. I
know all this, and yet, somehow, I still feel like an imposition.

Normally, it’s not so bad feeling this way. Normally, I just sit in my
quiet little room and do the small things that bring me pleasures. I
read my books, I answer email, I write a little bit. I’m not such a
nuisance to the world, and the kick I get out of living can, I suppose,
justify the impositions I make on it. But when life isn’t so fun, well,
then I start to wonder. What’s the point of going on if it’s just
trouble for us both?

My friends will miss me, I am told. And I guess it’s somewhat better
around friends. For some reason asking them for things doesn’t seem
quite so bad. Perhaps we’ve established some rapport, perhaps I feel
I’ve given *them* enough to justify my small requests, perhaps I feel
like my friends are special people who think along the same lines I do
and thus understand my needs. (Inner critic: “Yeah, only a fellow genius
would understand your special need for *water*. Jesus, what a dweeb.”)
But even so, I feel reticent. Even among my closest friends, I still
feel like something of an imposition, and the slightest shock, the
slightest hint that I’m correct, sends me scurrying back into my hole.

I know, I know, I’m wrong, I’m wrong to feel this way. My friends love
me. They remark, spontaneously, about how nice it is to have me around.
They invite me over to their houses to hang out. Indeed, at this very
moment, two of my very favorite people to hang out with are actually
fighting — fighting! — over the supposed privilege of having me live
with them. “I just want to point out,” one says, “that I have never
tickled you.” “I just want to point out,” replies the other, “that I
have never gotten you to attach clothespins to your face.”

Clearly, rationally, I am in the wrong. These people like me. (Inner
cynic: “If only to have someone around to tickle and pinch.”) No, no,
they genuinely like me. But the idea that people might actually *want*
to be around me takes an amazing amount of getting used to. Last night,
for the first time, I invited some people over to my apartment. I’ve
never done this before. But, to my amazement, they all came. They even
brought their friends. I ran out of chairs. The idea that a group of
people would want to come over to see me was kind of stunning. Someone
even brought wine.

OK, so perhaps there is a small group of people who, whether through
quirks of genetics or some childhood trauma, appear, as best as I can
tell, to actively enjoy my company. (Inner elitist: “Or just need
excuses to drink wine?”) But this does not excuse my impositions on the
store clerk, the librarian, the man inquiring after my high school who I
downright lied to — *lied* to! — just to avoid pointing out the error of
his preconceptions, the bus driver who I had to distract with my
inability to use the new stored-value payment machines, or the waiter at
that restaurant I went to the other day who, I later realized to my
endless mortification, I forgot to properly tip. (Waiter, if you’re out
there, please send me your address so I can mail you your tip! I’m so
sorry!) These people did not request the dubious pleasure of my company.
I have no justification for bothering them with my requests.

Oh, but you know, I really want some water…
