(The Dandy Warhols) Come Down
=============================

September 22, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/comedown)

* * * * *

Well, the Wikipedia election has finally ended. The good news is that I
can now talk about other things again. (For example, did you know that
Erik Möller eats babies?) I have a backlog of about 20 posts that I
built up over the course of the election. But instead of springing them
on you all at once, I’ll try to do daily posting again starting Monday.
(Oooh.)

The actual results haven’t been announced yet (and probably won’t be for
another couple days, while they check the list of voters for people who
voted twice) but my impression is that I probably lost. Many wags have
commented on how my campaign was almost destined to lose: I argued that
the hard-core Wikipedia contributors weren’t very important, but those
were precisely the people who could vote for me — in other words, I
alienated my only constituency.

“[Aaron Swartz: Why is he getting so much
attention?](http://nonbovine-ruminations.blogspot.com/2006/09/aaron-swartz-why-is-he-getting-so-much.html)”
wrote fellow candidate Kelly Martin. “The community has long known that
edit count is a poor measure of contributions”. Others, meanwhile,
insisted my claims were so obviously wrong as to not be even worth
discussing.

Jimbo Wales, on the other hand, finally sent me a nice message the other
day letting me know that he’d removed the offending section from his
talk and looked forward to sitting down with me and investigating the
topic more carefully.

And for my part, I hope to be able to take up some of the offers I’ve
received for computer time and run my algorithm across all of Wikipedia
and publish the results in more detailed form. (I’d also like to use the
results to put up a little website where you can type in the name of a
page and see who wrote what, color-coded or something like that.)

As for the election itself, it’s much harder to draw firm conclusions.
It’s difficult in any election, this one even more so because we have so
little data — no exit polls or phone surveys or even TV pundits to rely
upon. Still, I’m fairly content seeing the kind words of all the
incredible people I respect. Their support means a great deal to me.

The same is true of the old friends who wrote in during my essays along
with all the new people who encouraged me to keep on writing. Writing
the essays on a regular schedule was hard work — at one point, after
sleeping overnight at my mother’s bedside in the hospital, I trundled
down at seven in the morning to find an Internet connection so I could
write and post one — but your support made it worth the effort.

I hope that whoever wins takes what I’ve written into consideration. I’m
not sure who that is yet, but there are some hints. I was reading an
irreverent site critical of Wikipedia when I came across its claim that
Jimbo Wales had sent an email to the Wikipedia community telling them
who they should vote for. I assumed the site had simply made it up to
attack Jimbo, but when I searched I found [it really was
genuine](http://mail.wikipedia.org/pipermail/foundation-l/2006-September/009964.html):

> I personally strongly strongly support the candidacies of Oscar and
> Mindspillage.
>
> […]
>
> There are other candidates, some good, but at least some of them are
> entirely unacceptable because they have proven themselves repeatedly
> unable to work well with the community.

For those reading the tea leaves, this suggests that the results will be
something like: Eloquence, Oscar, Mindspillage. But we’ll see.

The let-down after the election is probably not the best time to make
plans but, if I had to, I’d probably decide to stay out of Wikipedia
business for a while. It’s a great and important project, but not the
one for me.

Anyway, now everyone can [go back to vandalizing my Wikipedia
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz). Laters.
