Improving the Foo Camp Format
=============================

August 5, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/foofix)

* * * * *

I’ve been to several Foo Camps now and always the system has been
identical: Get a bunch of meeting rooms of varying sizes. Invite a bunch
of the top people you know of in the field. Have them write the
schedule.

When you first arrive, Tim meets and greets at the door, his associates
behind him ask for your name and give you a badge and a t-shirt and a
short form to fill out. The form has your name on it and asks a few
questions about what you do and who they should invite next year and
that sort of thing. Then they take your photo and print it onto the top
of the form and put all the forms up on the wall in a huge display that
you have to be pretty tall to see all of.

You mingle as everyone arrives and then you all cram into a big meeting
room. Tim and his compatriots give an opening address welcoming you to
the conference and explaining the format. Then everyone (all 300 people
or so!) stand up and say their name, affiliation, and three words to
describe themselves (usually going over). Sometimes people shout talk
when they think the person should give a talk. Then Tim says a few more
words and they wheel out huge paper foam boards with the schedule
outline printed on them. It lists the name of the room and the number of
people it approximately holds at the top and the session times on the
side. Then Tim says go and there’s a mad scramble to the boards with
people pushing each other out of the way to write down their preferred
session.

This always struck me as a bit silly for a computer company. The people
I most want to hear — like aging James Randi — can’t exactly push their
way to the front of the crowd. And the people who are convinced that
their topic is the most important for everyone to go to are usually
deathly boring.

How would I do it? First, I would put a few words of description on
people’s badges and wall-cards. Second, I would put the wall-cards
online. (They’re digital photos anyway.) Third, during the name
introductions I’d point a video camera at the person introducing
themselves and project it onto the big screen up front so that people
don’t flip around their chairs and crane to see.

But the main thing I’d do is make people pitch for their sessions. There
are a bunch of different ways to do this, but the one I like best at the
moment (and thus the one I’d try first) is to hand out PRS devices to
the audience (these are little hand-held gadgets that send an IR pulse
to a computer at the front of the room recording a vote on something)
and then have all the people who want to hold a session form a line
going towards the back of the room. Each person in the line gets 30
seconds to pitch their session. If people like it, they press a button
on the PRS and their vote gets recorded. After the pitch, someone enters
the presenter name, the session name, and the estimated length into the
computer recording the votes. (If someone in the line wants to hold a
similar session, they can consult with the person pitching and merge
things.)

Once every session has been pitched, the computer does a constraint
optimization problem to schedule only the most popular sessions in
timeslots with the least conflicts (the computer knows if a person wants
to see both James Randi and Eugenie Scott, so it can try to avoid having
them speak at the same time) and place them in rooms with the
appropriate amount of space. This schedule is printed up and placed on
the website, maybe with a few spots reserved for last-minute changes,
and this is what people follow.

Aside from being a really sexy use of constraint optimization, this
solves a lot of problems: people get a little taste of every session,
the most interesting sessions are scheduled, conflicts (wanting to see
two sessions that are scheduled to the same time) are minimized, rooms
are allocated by audience size instead of by ego size. If you want, you
can even print up a schedule for each participant, with the computer
telling them which is the session they liked most at every timeslot.

Buying [a bunch of PRSs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audience_response)
can’t be that expensive — for comparison, Google purchased two nights at
a hotel for every guest — and you can reuse them every year. If giving
people a chance to pitch their sessions takes too long, you can have
them submit a one paragraph description to a web site and let people
vote on the web site. If this requires too many attendees have laptops
with them, you can have them do this before the conference. But that
requires more foresight than I expect the average attendee has, which is
why I like the PRS system. I’m not sure why O’Reilly sticks to paper.

**Update:** By email, [Peter
Kazanjy](http://thesecomefromtrees.blogspot.com/) suggests another
variation: have people write their session ideas up on cards, put the
cards on the wall, then have everyone make a mark on their top five
ideas, then schedule the cards and rooms based on how many marks they
have.
