How Quantum Mechanics is Compatible with Free Will
==================================================

March 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/quantumwill)

* * * * *

The actions of almost everything in this world are causally determined
by the state of the world that precedes them. Once you start a machine,
if no one touches it, its behavior can be predicted entirely in advance
from the laws of physics. When you drop a pen down a well, it is
physically necessary that it fall.

But our behavior doesn’t feel that way. When we stick out our tongue it
feels as if we had to specifically choose to stick it out, that this was
our own action and not a predetermined consequence of the existing state
of the world.

Some people argue that because the evidence for determinism is so
overwhelming, free will must simply be an illusion. But if so, it is a
very odd kind of illusion. Most illusions result from a naive
interpretation of our senses. For example, in a classic illusion, two
drawings of equal size appear to be of different size. But when we are
told this is an illusion, we can correct for it, and behave under the
new (more accurate) impression that the drawings are in fact of equal
size.

This simply isn’t possible with free will. If someone tells you that you
do not actually have free will but have actually been acting under an
illusion, you cannot sit back and let determinism take over. When the
waiter asks you whether you like soup or salad, you cannot say “Oh, well
I’ve just learned that free will is an illusion and all my actions are
completely determined by the previous state of the world, so I’ll just
let them play themselves out.” I mean, you can say that, but the waiter
will look at you like you’re crazy and you will get neither soup nor
salad.

It seems overwhelmingly bizarre that evolution would have given us this
strangest of illusions. This is not a spandrel, a small place evolution
never had time to be concerned about. The illusion of free will affects
all aspects of our lives and takes an enormous amount of work. One would
think evolution would have eliminated it were it genuinely false.

So what is the other possibility? The other possibility is that not all
actions are entirely determined by the preexisting state of the world.
And, in fact, recent advances in physics seem to show this is somewhat
the case. Quantum mechanics suggests that at some fundamental level
there is randomness involved in the laws of the world. And chaos theory
shows us that small amounts of randomness in a system can have real
large-scale effects.

So, although it seems extremely improbable, if we have to avoid the
improbability of evolution not breeding out an illusory free will, then
we’re forced to look to the randomness of quantum mechanics for an
explanation.

But, some argue, this is insufficient. Quantum mechanics only gives us
randomness — but free will isn’t just the pursuit of random behavior,
it’s the pursuit of particular behaviors. While quantum mechanics can’t
predict each individual bit, it does give overall probability
distributions. Volitional behaviors would wreak havoc with those even
distributions.

Not true. Imagine the simple case where we have one quantum bitstream: a
series of zeroes and ones, in which each individual number cannot be
predicted, but there’s an overall law saying that roughly half of them
will be one and half will be zero. And let us simplify the system to say
that if the result of the quantum effect is 0 then the person moves
left, and if it’s 1 they move right. In the naive scenario, free will
affects this quantum bitstream so that when the person wants to move
left the randomness keeps coming up zeroes. But that would violate the
laws of physics — the results would no longer be half ones and half
zeroes.

So here’s the trick: first, the system gets a random bit from some other
source. Then it adds the bit from the other source with the bit from the
quantum bitstream and uses the result to decide if you move left or
right. Now, when you want to continually move left, half the time you’ll
have to make the quantum bitstream return zeroes and the other half the
time ones — exactly what the laws of quantum mechanics require.

With a little additional mathematical complexity, the scenario is
generalizable to much more complicated quantum functions and human
results. But the basic principle is the same: one can use quantum
randomness to exercise free will without violating any statistical laws.

Of course, this still leaves one key problem. What is picking the
results of this quantum bitstream? And how does it do it? I have to
admit I cannot really think of a sensible way. But this seems like a
problem for neurobiology to figure out and report back to us. I merely
aim to prove that its doing so is consistent with what we know about the
laws of physics.
