A Call for Science that Matters
===============================

April 24, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stmcall)

* * * * *

Ever see a study that makes you scratch your beard? Ever hear about a
research result that makes you go “I wish everybody knew about this!”?
Ever want to run into a congressman’s office and hit them over the head
with a journal article? In this era of technological complexity and
postmodern fiction, sometimes brain scans can reveal more about the
human condition than a new novel. And yet, while the novels get detailed
reviews in the *New York Times*, the best a research study is likely to
get is an inaccurate description and some ambiguous quotes from the
study’s authors.

Well, here’s your chance to change that. In the comments, post your
favorite study — the one that makes you sit up and say “wow, this result
ought to change everything”. If you don’t mind, we’ll take the best to
help fill up a new website we’re starting, collecting and sharing these
new research results. (If you want to help us with the project, [be sure
to let us know!](mailto:editors@sciencethatmatters.com))

I’ll go first:

In 1994, the RAND Corporation, a major US military think tank, conducted
a massive study (with funding from the Office of National drug Control
Policy, the US Army, and the Ford Foundation) to measure the
effectiveness of various forms of preventing the use of illegal drugs,
particularly cocaine.

They analyzed a variety of popular methods and calculated how much it
would cost to use each method to reduce cocaine consumption in the US by
1%. Source-country control — military programs to destroy drug
production in countries like Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia — are not just
devastating to poor third-world citizens; they’re also the least
effective, costing \$783 million for a 1% reduction. Interdiction —
seizing the drugs at the border — is a much better deal, costing only
\$366 million. Domestic law enforcement — arresting drug dealers and
such — is even better, at \$246 million. But all of those are blown
completely out of the water by the final option: funding treatment
programs for drug addicts would reduce drug use by 1% at a cost of only
\$34 million.

In other words, for every dollar spent on trying to stop drugs through
source-country control, we could get the equivalent of twenty dollars
benefit by spending the same money on treatment. This isn’t a bunch of
hippy liberals saying this. This is a government think tank, sponsored
by the US Army.

-   [Read the
    study](http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR331/index2.html)

OK, your turn.
