What’s Going On Here?
=====================

May 15, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whaaaa)

* * * * *

I’m adding this post not through blogging software, like I normally do,
but by hand, right into the webpage. It feels odd. I’m doing this
because a week or so ago my web server started making funny error
messages and not working so well. The web server is in Chicago and I am
in California so it took a day or two to get someone to check on it. The
conclusion was the hard drive had been fried.

When the weekend ended, we sent the disk to a disk repair place. They
took a look at it and a couple days later said that they couldn’t do
anything. The heads that normally read and write data on a hard drive by
floating over the magnetized platter had crashed right into it. While
the computer was giving us error messages it was also scratching away a
hole in the platter. It got so thin that you could see through it.

This was just in one spot on the disk, though, so we tried calling the
famed Drive Savers to see if they could recover the rest. They seemed to
think they wouldn’t have any better luck. (Please, plase, please, [tell
me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) if you know someplace to try.)

I hadn’t backed the disk up for at least a year (in fairness, I was
literally going to back it up when I found it giving off error messages)
and the thought of the loss of all that data was crushing. I broke down
crying and couldn’t function.

I’ve since been trying to piece things together from the old backup and
the Google cache and so on, but it’s a painful and time-consuming
process, and even without this on my hands I am extremely lacking time.
I’ll try my best, though.

Thanks to everyone for their kind words and support. If you have some
files you think I might be missing, [let me
know](mailto:me@aaronsw.com). If you have some disposable income and
want to help fund the purchase of a new server and perhaps the recovery
of the old disk, [you can make a
donation](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_xclick&business=me%40aaronsw%2ecom&item_name=Server+Support).

Sorry for screwing up.


Getting Back On Track
=====================

June 1, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/metamake)

* * * * *

Just how crazy am I? Well, tonight I wrote my own weblogging system. One
of the silver linings of [losing a
server](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whaaaa) is that you get to rebuild
things just the way you like.

Anyway, this might mean I’ll start posting more. Or maybe not.

Either way, this site is now proudly powered by good old `make`.

(For those who are interested [the code is now
up](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/code/) but it’s probably not easily
usable by most.)


The God Who Wasn’t There (And The One Who Was)
==============================================

June 1, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thegodmovie)

* * * * *

“I was doing some research into the idea that Jesus never existed. When
I first looked into it, I thought it was just a crackpot theory and I
was curious why anyone would believe this,” explains Brian Flemming. “To
my surprise I found the evidence kept stacking up. The more I looked
into it, the more that the facts aligned with those who said Jesus was
just a legendary character. The shaky evidence and the poor reasoning
were actually on the side of those who said that Jesus did exist.”

And so Flemming (*Bat Boy: The Musical*, *Nothing So Strange*, *Fair &
Balanced*, and all-around digital rights supporter) decided to make a
movie. The result, which is currently being screened across the country
in theaters and at atheist organizations and will be released on DVD
soon, is a shockingly good film.

Flemming begins at the beginning: the popular story of Jesus. In a
hilarious montage of old footage taken from the Prelinger archives
underneath deadpan narration, he tells the story in six minutes. And
then it’s on to debunking it. Through interviews with various experts,
illustrated with entertaining graphics, he tries to reconstruct the
historical evidence for the story…only to find there isn’t much and a
lot doesn’t add up.

Convinced the story is wrong, Flemming takes aim at the right-wing
Christian fundamentalists who act based on it, the wishy-washy Christian
moderates who enable them, and the rest of the system. He concludes by
heading back home to the fundamentalist Christian school he attended as
a child to confront the principal about what he’s teaching children.

Flemming’s previous film, *Nothing So Strange* ([which I also
reviewed](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001102)) was interesting but, in
fairness, rather amateurish. No such criticism can be made of this film,
which has some of the best graphics I’ve seen in a documentary and a
brilliant score composed from the Creative Commons-licensed Wired CD by
the hertofore-unknown DJ Madson (a nom-de-plume of Flemming, I’m
beginning to suspect) by remixing popular artists. The whole thing, from
the interviews down to the promotional posters, hangs together so well
that it’s hard to believe Flemming is doing this all himself, but
apparently he is, with no liberal atheist conspiracy to back him.

(Although, in full disclosure, Larry Lessig and former Creative Commons
executive director Glenn Otis Brown receive special thanks in the
credits. And in a remote Q&A via iChat after the screening here at
Stanford, Flemming was wearing a Creative Commons shirt. So if you want
to investigate a conspiracy, that’s where I’d look.)

On the other hand, Flemming has always had what Bill O’Reilly might call
a “parasitic” sense of self-promotion. His film *Nothing So Strange*
received press largely because it included scenes of Bill Gates being
assassinated. And during the California Recall, Flemming jumped into the
fray on the platform “If elected, I will resign.” (Thus making Lt.
Governor Bustamante governor, since at the time he was refusing to run,
thinking he’d draw support away from the actual governor.) When FOX sued
Al Franken for using the phrase “Fair and Balanced”, Flemming wrote a
play with the name. When Arnold Schwarzenegger sued the makers of a
bobblehead version of him, Flemming posted a photo of Arnold’s penis.

Both times, he insisted the works were a form of political protest, but
he still charged money for the products. He did the same when he
released portions of *Nothing So Strange* under a Creative Commons
license. It’s one thing to support free speech; it’s another to try to
make money off of other people’s support for it. What’s unsettling about
this film is not how Flemming is using various atheist groups to screen
and promote it — that’s perfectly reasonable, especially since he’s
giving the DVDs to the groups at outrageously low prices.

No, what’s unsettling is a hidden feature on Flemming’s site called the
Grassroots Promotion Team or GPT. In general these things are nothing
new — just personally, I remember volunteering for Apple when the iMac
came out and joining a “Street Team” website to promote a Buffy DVD. The
idea behind such sites is that your particular group of obsessive lonely
fans will spend their free time promoting your products on various
forums and websites in exchange for a chance to win some lame prizes.

It’s sad when big corporations do this, but when independent political
folks like Flemming do it, it becomes a little creepy. It’s also
problematic. Take the movie’s soundtrack, which is sold on Amazon.
Normally such obscure CDs have hardly any reviews. But this one not only
had 11, but they were all amazingly glowing. “Wow, this CD must be
really good,” I thought. But when I saw Flemming was awarding 100
“points” for each Amazon review, it suddenly made sense. If everyone
plays this game, Amazon reviews will quickly become meaningless, which
is why I don’t think it’s a very good idea to start.

The film is valuable and grassroots promotion of it is certainly a good
thing. I just wish it felt a little less like using well-meaning people
to make money for Flemming and a little more like a cooperative
community with the aim of spreading the Real News.

* * * * *

*Brian Flemming responds:*

Thanks for the kind words about the movie. I agree with some of your
criticism of the street team, but I think your aim is off the mark with
much of it.

1.  AMAZON REVIEWS. There’s an old phrase in publicity, “I don’t care if
    the review is positive or negative, just put the title in the
    headline.” As an indie filmmaker always struggling to get the word
    out against competing messages backed by tens of millions of
    dollars, I definitely subscribe to this philosophy. It was never the
    design of the movie’s street team to load up Amazon with praise
    (frankly, a mix of angry one-star reviews and passionate five-star
    reviews would be better). It’s no secret that authors and their
    publishers and friends stack the Amazon book reviews (as has been
    documented), but I don’t wish to add to that clutter. I’ve never
    asked anyone to post nice things on Amazon about the soundtrack CD
    for The God Who Wasn’t There, or to withhold negative statements
    (and I have not posted a review myself). Street team members are
    given a free (digital) copy of the soundtrack and encouraged to go
    to Amazon and post a review of the music—that’s it. About 5% of them
    do. There’s no incentive to make the review positive or negative.
    However, while I think the street team members’ reviews of the
    soundtrack CD on Amazon are sincere, and no harm has been done, this
    particular sample does naturally skew positive—if you’re on the
    street team, you probably like the film/soundtrack you’ve decided to
    back with your time. But then again, reviews are inherently
    biased—and fans tend to be more motivated than others in posting.
    Most reviews on Amazon for most media products are positive for that
    reason. I’ll freely admit to sending people to Amazon—but my goal is
    battling obscurity, not battling negative opinion. And I certainly
    can’t stop anyone from posting a negative review.

2.  THE STREET TEAM ITELF. A “street team” is a group of volunteer
    supporters who distribute flyers and stickers and otherwise spread
    the word about a band or film online and offline. You say, “It’s sad
    when big corporations do this, but when independent political folks
    like Flemming do it, it becomes a little creepy.” Here’s where I
    think your aim is considerably off the mark. To be opposed to a
    street team is nearly tantamount to being opposed to the very idea
    of promoting indie artists. I believe promotion should be honest and
    ethical, but promotion itself is not an evil. And organizing
    promotion is not an evil. To eliminate street teams would be largely
    to give up and turn over the marketplace to those who have the money
    to promote via advertising and other expensive means. It would
    strengthen messages backed by money and weaken messages backed by
    passion. I think the street team for The God Who Wasn’t There is a
    great example of passion being organized into action, and I’m proud
    of it. I give theatrical rights away for free—and then a group like
    SF Atheists holds a screening and earns upwards of \$1000 to help
    their extremely important efforts. Volunteers go to a website where
    grassroots action is made easier—and conversations all over the web
    get started over whether Jesus really did exist, a very legitimate
    question that is nonetheless the third rail of mainstream-media
    conversations about Christianity. Street teams aren’t “creepy,” and
    this one in particular is doing some very real, verifiable good.

3.  MONEY. You write that when I attacked Arnold Schwarzenegger and Bill
    O’Reilly via Fair Use Press, I “insisted the works were a form of
    political protest, but [Flemming] still charged money for the
    products. He did the same when he released portions of Nothing So
    Strange under a Creative Commons license. It’s one thing to support
    free speech; it’s another to try to make money off of other people’s
    support for it.” Really, I’m just shaking my head in wonder at this
    accusation. I have never made any profit whatsoever from any of my
    Fair Use Press e-books. The Schwarzenegger attack was given away,
    with a high-res “premium” edition sold at first for \$1 (both
    editions are free now and have been for about a year). I added a \$1
    price to that specifically to demonstrate fair use—that I wasn’t
    taking a “noncommercial” copout, so Schwarzenegger and his attorney
    couldn’t claim that’s why they didn’t sue. That’s what my activism
    through Fair Use Press is about—demonstrating the limits of fair
    use. I want people to look at what I do, see that I got away with
    it, and then do more of the same. The commercial marketplace—where
    messages like Bill O’Reilly’s already live—is an important
    battlefield in this fight. Just because I fight in that space
    doesn’t mean I’m making a profit from Fair Use Press. I don’t, and
    it certainly isn’t part of the plan (I spend far more on promotion
    and advertising than I take in). And my best-case scenario for The
    God Who Wasn’t There is to break even on marketing expenses
    (production costs are already written off, gladly, as a loss). All
    of my indie-film work and free-culture activism operates in the red,
    subsidized by the Hollywood work-for-hire assignments I take that
    also pay my rent. I’m not, as you say, “using well-meaning people to
    make money.” I’m putting in my own money and time to the same
    purpose as the people I’m working side-by-side with. The fact that
    we earn revenue to try to keep the project somewhat self-sustaining
    cannot reasonably be termed exploitation.

Criticism is a good thing, Aaron, and we free-culture activists of
course do need to criticize each other where criticism is justified. And
I certainly should be held publicly accountable for anything I publicly
do. But in this case I really think you’ve gone overboard and made
accusations that have little merit.

* * * * *

*Aaron replies:*

Thanks for responding. I can’t say I’m *glad* to hear you don’t expect
to turn a profit on any of this, but it certainly allays any fears of
exploitation.

But I feel like you missed my main point about the street team — the one
I ended the article with: “I just wish it felt … a little more like a
cooperative community with the aim of spreading the Real News.” There’s
nothing wrong with telling people about music or movies you like, or
even putting up posters to promote them. Where it gets creepy is when
this natural enthusiasm is co-opted and channeled into a structured,
top-down sort of system. Now I’m not just expressing my opinions, I’m
following orders so I can get goodies. That fundamentally changes
things.

Maybe an analogy will help. My mom likes telling people about
interesting things I’ve done. There’s nothing wrong with this — the
people she talks to like knowing this stuff. But you have to admit it
would be creepy if I started providing my mom with a list of my
achievements and awarding her points every time she found a way to
mention them. Mom begins to feel used, her friends begin to feel duped,
and I look like a narcissist.

There’s no need to get rid of the promotion system, just scale it back a
little. Provide a list of suggested actions, a forum where people can
talk about what they’re doing, and then offer to mail a t-shirt or
something to people who work hard.

You see, contrary to popular opinion — even in the free culture
community, oddly enough — rewards are incredibly destructive. Study
after study shows they actually *demotivate* people, encourage people to
cheat and lie, and cause them to make stupid decisions about trade-offs.
For an excellent book on the subject, see *Alfie Kohn’s Punished By
Rewards*.

-   [Official site](http://www.thegodmovie.com/)
-   [Flemming’s post on independent
    distribution](http://www.slumdance.com/blogs/brian_flemming/archives/001604.html)



Stanford: Season Finale
=======================

June 4, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/season1finale)

* * * * *

June 3

Nobody likes being called to the principal’s office. Even in high school
when the principal was “cool” — I’d tell him school was harmful and
should be abolished, he’d agree, and we’d talk about it — it still felt
wrong. And it always felt worse when, as surprisingly often was the
case, the powerful man in the big chair talked about how powerful you,
the puny little pushed-around student, were.

I remember the time in 7th grade that the teacher told me to leave the
room and fill out one of his “dispute resolution forms” — his method of
classroom discipline. I resisted by filling out the form in an absurd
manner, because the whole thing was just so degrading. Then the teacher
complained that *I* was being condescending! (A few years later, after
the 7th grade teacher had moved out to a cabin in the Pacific Northwest
with my 6th grade teacher, he came back to school and seemed much
cooler, so I don’t think it was really his fault.)

*You sure weren’t rich, didn’t live in the city\
 Didn’t whisper sweet nothings, never told me I’m pretty*

All this by way of saying I received a rather discomfitting feeling when
[unnamed authority figure] sent me a cryptic note saying she wanted me
to come see her. I asked her about what but she never replied. (She
later explained that she meant to but it just got behind.)

Worried, I asked a few people about what [unnamed authority figure] did.
“Have you committed any crimes recently?” asked one. “Not that I know
of,” I said. “Maybe I kill people in my sleep?” But how do I dispose of
the bodies? The lake’s already run dry! Another, always optimistic,
insisted it must be a good thing. “They wouldn’t have her deliver bad
news. It can only be good.” I wasn’t buying it.

As I walked to the meeting, there was a different disposition. I heard a
girl screaming her lungs out and then slapping her boyfriend, who had
apparently cheated on her. The boyfriend was desperately penitent,
insisting it was just an accident, not a pattern, and that he loved her.

*You cheated at cards, and lied when you hung out\
 in bars making time with those girls you called old pals*

None of this eased my discomfort, nor did the fact that I had a major
assignment due in a couple hours. 90% of my grade in one class depended
on what work I turned in today by 5pm and I hadn’t really started on it.
I tried to do it last night but I couldn’t bring myself to do it until I
was too tired to make any progress. I wasn’t sure I’d have any better
luck this morning.

When I finally saw [unnamed authority figure] she was so happy that I
couldn’t stop myself from smiling. Maybe she was right — maybe it was
good news. Then we sat down. “I wanted to talk to you about some of your
behavior,” she began. Oh, this wasn’t going to be good.

*I cried when you left me,\
 now I’m wondering when you’ll make it all up to me?*

She said she’d been tipped off by my IHUM TF, which was odd, since we’d
just had a long talk a week ago or so and I thought we’d worked
everything out. Not that there really was a whole lot to work out.
Actually, that talk probably just made it worse.

But then she’d done her own research and begun telling me what she’d
uncovered:

-   She’d pulled my admissions applications and saw that I was really
    self-schooled, meaning I was probably “a bit more isolated or
    sheltered from your peers than might be typical.”

-   She checked with the Residence Dean at my dorm and found [I was too
    shy to ask someone for help moving a filing
    cabinet](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001421).

-   She also heard (amazingly) that I’d [written some hurtful
    things](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001641) about a “young woman I
    was dating”.

-   The TF had said that I once blurted something out in class, which I
    don’t really remember specifically but certainly seems plausible.

-   The TF also claimed that once I had jumped out at her and said boo.

-   The TF also said that I’d once said she went to a lower-class school
    and suggested I was trying to call her authority into question.

“It paints an interesting picture for me,” she said. I laughed to
myself. “Heh, it’s just like one of those television season finales, you
know, where the main characters get called before an authority figure
who then proceeds to list everything they’ve done over the season, only
it’s all a little off and a little out-of-context.” Like that *Seinfeld*
finale, where everyone they’d ever met started to testify against them.
(See how I self-consciously point out the clichés I’m in? Let it never
be said that this blog is not post-modern!)

It certainly was an interesting picture. I was beginning to sound sort
of autistic or something. “I feel like I’ve made a couple mistakes,” I
said, “but doesn’t everyone? The difference is that mine are just a
little more public and mine are the ones being scrutinized.” If reality
TV has taught us anything, it’s that you can find something in anything,
if you look hard enough.

*[Don’t I have the
right](http://www.tmbw.net/wiki/index.php/Don%27t_I_Have_The_Right) to
be over you yet?\
 I’ve tried pretending. I tried to forget.*

We kept talking — for a half-hour altogether — but every time I tried to
tell her about myself it just kept sounding worse. The facts were all
able to fit the frame.

“Well, what suggestions do you have?” I finally asked. “One strange
thing about me is that I love hearing negative things about myself.”
“You do?” she replied. “Yeah, I guess most people, when they receive
nasty letters, they feel bad or something. But I love them — the nastier
the better. the ones that are all obscentities just make my day.”

“Why?” she asked. “I don’t know,” I said and thought about it. “There’s
this theory,” I said, “that’s very popular in our society that people
have certain specific attributes, like personality traits. So some
people are smart and other people are funny and that’s just how it is.

“I don’t believe that. I think people are malleable. I think I’m
malleable. So whe I hear something negative, I don’t think ‘oh no, I’m a
bad person’, I think ‘well, that’s something I can work on.’” She didn’t
seem convinced.

Well, she didn’t want to punish me or anything, she said, and she didn’t
know me well enough to give any specific advice, but she suggested I
talk to my friends (I tried to persuade her that I had some) and ask
them about my “outbursts” and “empathy”.

*Though it’s past three AM, I would still let you in\
 ‘cause I can’t go on dreaming alone.*

* * * * *

I couldn’t find anything to take to lunch to read, which is generally a
sign I’ll find someone to talk to. And sure enough I found one of those
friends and sat down. “Do you think I have problems with empathy?” I
asked him. “Uhhh, I don’t know,” he said. “Why?” I told him the story.
“Heh, that’s pretty funny,” he said. “You got called to the principal’s
office for hurting someone’s feelings.”

Afterwards, when my friend has left and I’m all alone, a hand grabs my
shoulder. I spin around but I don’t recognize its owner. “Hey, Schwartz,
I’m really sorry you didn’t win evil dictator last night,” he says.
“Uh-huh,” I mumble. “I voted for you,” he says. “Oh. Thank you,” I say
and walk away. After a few seconds I realize what he’s referring to —
the dorm passed out surveys for things like “funniest guy” and so on and
announced the results in a *Family Feud*-style gameshow last night.
Maybe I have more friends than I think.


Sneak Peek
==========

June 6, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sneakpeek)

* * * * *

VOICEOVER: *Aaron Swartz: The Stanford Diaries* will return in
September. Here’s a sneak preview of what to expect next season.

KIEFER SUTHERLAND appears in a completely black room.

KIEFER: Hi, I’m Kiefer Sutherland. You might know me better as Aaron
Swartz in *Aaron Swartz: The Stanford Diaries*. (beat) It’s been an
exciting year, culminating in a jam-packed season finale. But that’s not
all there is to the story. Next year, I again play Aaron Swartz in
*Aaron Swartz: The Stanford Diaries*, but this time there’s a whole lot
more to the story.

> AARON SWARTZ and UNSEEN TEACHER meet in a parking garage. Teacher
> stays in the shadows, face never revealed, although he or she is
> clearly wearing a trenchcoat.
>
> AARON: Oh, hey. I just wanted to tell you I read that book you
> recommended.
>
> TEACHER: Oh, good!
>
> AARON: Well, I guess I’ll see you next year.
>
> As Aaron turns to head away the teacher GRABS him by the arm.
>
> TEACHER: Wait, there’s something I need to tell you.
>
> AARON: Oh?
>
> TEACHER: I read your last paper, Aaron. That wasn’t appropriate.
>
> AARON: What do you mean?
>
> TEACHER: I think you know what I mean.
>
> AARON: The assignment was to write about sex, the body, or
> reproduction. I wrote about sex.
>
> TEACHER: Well, in the context of what you said to me, I had to take it
> to the sexual harrassment center. We just had a consult about it and
> it’s going in your file, but they’re not opening an investigation on
> you or anything. I’m sure you didn’t mean it as harrassment but I had
> to take it to them just to be safe.
>
> AARON: Oh. OK.
>
> TEACHER: I didn’t really have a choice, Aaron, given what you said.
> Don’t worry, you’re not in trouble or anything.
>
> AARON: I said OK. Is there anything more you can tell me?
>
> TEACHER: Well, it’s confidential.
>
> AARON: But it’s about me! I waive my confidentiality rights.

KIEFER: Was the sexual harrassment claim responsible for the meeting
with [unnamed authority figure]? Will this “file” open on Aaron cause
later misunderstandings to be seen in a negative light, causing Aaron to
be suspended or even expelled for the things he said, forcing him to
turn around and hire the right-wing Foundation for Individual Rights in
Education to sue Stanford University under California’s Leonard Law
which extends First Amendment protection to private universities? Who
knows? I just read the scripts they give me.

The actual AARON SWARTZ marches out in front of Kiefer.

AARON: OK, that’s enough. Hi, I’m Aaron Swartz, author of *Aaron Swartz:
The Stanford Diaries*. Despite the 24 season finale and Deep Throat
references I’ve chosen to use in this post, I’d just like to let folks
out there know that this meeting actually did happen, although not in a
parking garage.

KIEFER: Are we done here because, uh, I’ve got some people in my trunk I
need to take care of.

AARON: Yeah, let me give you a hand with that.

Kiefer and Aaron walk off into the SUNSET that has just appeared in
their solid black room.


SFP: Home, Sweet, Home
======================

June 9, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfp-apt)

* * * * *

I started looking for an apartment [as soon as we headed out to
Cambridge for an interview](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001679) but
few things had been made available yet. Then [the server
died](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whaaaa) and I was distraught for a
while. By the time I started looking again, few things were available
and in the past few weeks things have gotten increasingly desperate.

We went through craigslist and made up a list of options, but each one
seemed to fall apart upon investigation. Occasionally, especially as
deadlines moved closer, I would stumble across an amazing deal and throw
all of my hope into it, convincing myslf that we’d get it and all would
work out fine. These deals repeatedly collapsed, eventually leaving me
where I was this morning: at Stanford, without an apartment or a plane
ticket, and getting kicked out the next morning.

My dad, thankfully, was at MIT this week and he took some time to go
down to the housing office and investigate their options. He discovered
that it was possible to get an MIT dorm room and pay by the night and
suggested I stay there while I figured out a more long-term place to
stay.

I was not looking forward to move out of one dorm room just to move into
another, but then he found that MIT’s [beautiful Simmons
Hall](http://web.mit.edu/evolving/projects/simmons/) (aka the bubble
wrap building — Sean insists “it looks like a Tetris reject”) was
available to stay in. I’d always admired photos of Simmons Hall, thought
of trying to find an excuse to visit, even considered going to MIT
because of it (until I realized that there was little chance I’d get to
stay there). And now I was getting to stay there — apparently we might
even be able to stay there for the whole summer.

So I signed up for a few nights — got an amazingly low room rate — and
bought a plane ticket for tomorrow morning — also surprisingly cheap and
perfect (I thought I’d have to leave out of some obscure airport and
stop in some obscure hub, but it’s direct from SF!). Procrastination
really worked out this time, it seems. Too bad I didn’t get this kind of
peace of mind earlier; then I could have spent the week on the town!
(Although I did have some fun [Segwaying with
Seth](http://vitanuova.loyalty.org/weblog/nb.cgi/view/vitanuova/2005/06/05/0)
and going to dinner with some of Apple’s Safari team…)

Now I just need to finish packing.


Stanford/SFP: Leaving on a Jet Plane
====================================

June 11, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stanford2sfp)

* * * * *

It’s always odd how extraordinary things are just like their ordinary
counterparts. Stanford is just like a school, only wealthier. Leaving
home is just like going on vacation, only longer. And packing your dorm
is just like packing up your hotel room, only bigger.

Tonight the campus is so desolate: people missing, cars missing. Even
the room is beginning to seem empty, although the hallways are filled
with crud. I’m the last one left in our room of four people. With all my
schoolwork done, it’s surprisingly lonely. I wander down to talk to
other people packing.

* * * * *

*Goodbye Caroline (set of 3)*

[image links broken]

As I wait outside with my bags the next morning, kids slowly filer out
and sit on the top of the picnic table, just like the cool kids do in
television shows to indicate coolness. I sit away in the shade on the
chair. Eventually my ride shows up and the group of kids waves goodbye.
I wonder how many of them I’ll see again.

* * * * *

Bags are heavy. It’s a good thing I didn’t take public transportation —
there’s no way I would have made it. Not to mention the fact that when I
get here a voice over the speakers says that public transportation is
currently out. I wait in line for a long time at the curb until I get to
the front and they tell me they can’t check my bags anymore. Then I
spend a while running around looking for a cart machine that will take
my money, then I take the cart over to another long line and pay a lot
of money to take my bags on the plane. Good thing I’m early. I still
have two heavy bags to carry all the way to the terminal, unfortunately.
Somehow I survive without any major damage.

On the plane I read a long book which inspires me to write a long
memoir.

I then carry the heavy bags down to the baggage claim, buy another cart,
grab the bags of the conveyor belt, take them to the cab stand and ask
the cab driver to go to MIT. He doesn’t know where Simmons Hall is so he
tells me to stop him when we get close. I scan the windows, seeing
nothing but empty fields and abandoned warehouses when BOOM! this huge
building pops up, much larger than it seems in pictures. “That’s it!” I
say and the cabdriver backs up. He places my stuff on the curb as I pay
him and speeds off.

Inside an alienated student mans the desk, her lowered eyes
not-so-subtly implying that she really doesn’t want to talk to me. I
tell her I’m checking in. ‘Oh,’ she says in a dry monotone, ‘you’re that
guy. I thought you’d be older.’ She gives me a key and asks me to fill
out a confusing form, continually finding spots I haven’t filled out.
‘No, fill out everything — you left the box that says “\# of children”
blank.’ While I’m doing this some police come in and ask how to get to
tower B, she points them to the elevator at the end of the hall.

Finally I finish filling out the form and ask her how to get to my room.
She looks it up and concludes it’s in tower B, take the elevator at the
end of the hall. I decide to go on an exploratory mission with just one
bag to find my room before carrying everything down. It’s a good thing I
did since the elevator is surrounded by three cops. In front of them,
the elevator door is open revealing a whole group of kids in an elevator
stuck halfway between floors. The kids seem resigned to their situation
and are now sitting on the floor playing games. ‘I don’t trust these
f—-ing elevators,’ says one cop. ‘No way, me neither,’ answers another.
I decide to back away to give them some space.

After a short rest I decide to try the other elevator and it turns out
it’s much closer, so I laboriously drag my bags up and thru using it. On
the way to my room there is a picture window onto a deck with some sort
of yin-yang sculpture. The kids have filled it up with water and place
rubber duckies into it. Unfortunately, getting onto the deck requires a
keycard, which I don’t have.

* * * * *

Simmons Hall is indeed pretty, if a little warm. (Apparently the
computer lab is the only air conditioned room.) Meeting rooms of various
sorts are scattered throughout the place, each fitted with a whiteboard
and prints from Josef Albers’s *Interaction of Color*.

Oddly, each print is also accompanied by a note with a number to call
with “questions and concerns” about the artwork. (I imagine the MIT
student who calls and says “I have a concern about print \#49. Albers
clearly intended to use a 3,4,5 sequence but on the last square here
it’s printed as 3,4,6. Do you think you could send someone to take care
of this?”)

There are also a series of kitchens and TV rooms, each differently
shaped and furnished. Each TV room has a DVD player, VCR, and stairs up
to the next floor where, in a different location, there is another room
with a different shape and furnishings.

The floor plans of the building are printed by the elevator (for use in
case of fire, I guess) and they’re rather entertaining. They look just
like normal floor plans — squares and boxes with symbolic codes — except
it’s apparently been hit by a meteor, since there’s a big
squiggly-shaped hole right in the middle where the TV room is.

In one of the meeting rooms I found [a large
box](http://www.aaronsw.com/photos/sfp/IMG_2810.JPG/view) someone had
built out of wood, the inside covered in foam padding. Inside was a
strange-looking device, a switch, and a bunch of wires. Outside was a
light (currently off) that said “DIRECT FROM THE FUTURE”. I tried
figuring out what the box was, with little success. The whole thing felt
like a puzzle out of Myst or something.

The one thing I couldn’t find, however, was a bathroom on my floor. I
found a whole series of locked rooms with interesting labels —
Counseling, Student Government, Mail, Music, and my personal favorite
(if only because it was the one with no lock) Meditation — but no
bathroom. Finally I tried to open the unmarked door next to my room and
aha! a bathroom. Nice location, too. The only problem is it doesn’t have
lock.

* * * * *

The next day as I walk outside I’m hit in the face by Cambridge’s
dreadful weather. Unbearably snowy in the winter, it’s unbearably hot
and muggy in the summer. I guess it wasn’t just because I was carrying
bags yesterday that I was sweating. I walk the superblock to the student
center where I get some food and buy a fan for my room. It makes things
a little better but it’s still pretty terrible.

Anyone in Cambridge got an air conditioner I could borrow? Maybe I
should find someplace to buy one. **UPDATE:** The good folks at Y
Combinator brought me over an air conditioner which we jammed into one
of the windows and now it’s awesome. *Thanks!*

Finally, if anyone nearby wants to visit, just drop me an email.

SFP: First Contact
==================

June 15, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfpmtg1)

* * * * *

Most of what a startup — or at least this startup — is about is solving
various technical problems, fixing bugs, getting stuff done. At its
worst, this stuff is boring to do. And even at its best it’s hard to
describe and not much fun to hear. On the plane here I wrote a memoir
about my time with the W3C and what was striking was not just that I
omitted all the technical stuff from the story but that I don’t even
remember the technical stuff. People stuff, on the other hand…

So I’ve been holed up by myself in this elegant MIT dorm room. ([more
photos](http://www.figure-ground.com/travel/image.php?simmons) ([my
favorite](http://www.figure-ground.com/travel/image.php?simmons/0029)))
Jessica (formerly 4 of 4 from Y Combinator, the group that’s funding the
startup I’m working on) stopped by to drop off a lifesaving air
conditioner and we chatted for a bit. I get out once or twice a day to
go get food at someplace nearby. And at nights I sleep. But most of the
time I just work.

Y Combinator has weekly meetings where all the startups go over to their
offices for dinner. I missed last week’s because I didn’t have a dorm
and so when I get there I don’t recognize anyone. I sort of wander
around alone trying not to look too stupid, which is what I normally do
at parties anyway.

At some point we sit down at a long table with benches that they’ve
placed in the room, which looks even nicer than before, with elegantly
placed lights and abstract art on the walls. During some pre-dinner
conversation someone makes a pun. “You know, I read somewhere that bad
puns are highly correlated with IQ,” Paul says. ‘I find that hard to
believe,’ responds a founder, ‘I know some people who make lots of puns
and, well…’ ‘Correlations aren’t perfect,’ responds another. ‘And IQ
isn’t necessarily correlated with intelligence,’ comments Paul. I was
really glad to see he’d [backed off this
claim](http://www.paulgraham.com/start.html#footnote2). (I was thinking
about chiming in but I was at the very edge of the table and planning to
save my disagreements until after the money is in the bank.)

They plan to get a guest speaker each dinner; this week it was a patent
attorney, who admitted that patents were expensive and not very useful
to a startup he suggested (and cited a study that argued) they would be
useful later on. He gave us all packets and branded cell phone holders
but I forgot to take mine home.

Afterwards there was more talking. One group of founders described their
history. ‘Well, we haven’t really done any legitimate businesses
before,’ they said. ‘What illegitimate businesses have you done?’ I
asked. ‘Oh, adult entertainment, student term papers — nothing illegal
but not the sort of things you want to show to VCs!’

I got to talk to rtm which was really wonderful and at some point I
found myself in a conversation with Paul and a couple other people. Paul
asked me if I could send him a copy of [the infamous
paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sneakpeek) and another person
chimed in ‘oh you’re definitely sending me a copy.’ ‘Wait, you know
about this?’ asked Paul. ‘You don’t?’ replied the third person. It
turned out everyone there had read my blog. ‘Oh,’ said Paul, ‘I only
started reading it when it started mentioning *me*!’

Not long afterward a group of people behind me pulled me away and
introduced themselves. ‘And who are you?’ they asked. Paul, from behind
me, said ‘this is *Aaron Swartz*; you don’t know who *Aaron Swartz* is?
He co-authored RSS!’ ‘Oh,’ said the kid, ‘well then you made me quite a
bit of money!’

At some point Jessica pulled me aside to go over the legal paperwork of
which there is quite a bit.

A group of Russian kids offered to drive me home in their van. ‘We’re
actually agents from the KGB,’ they explained, laughing, in their thick
Russian accents, ‘we were sent here to spy on you. We bought a van
because we were told all Americans drive vans. We try to blend in.’ They
certainly made the most of it, swerving back and forth across the street
and making crazy turns. Amazingly, though, we managed to find my place
and they dropped me off.


SFP: Dinner with Dan
====================

June 16, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dinnerwdan)

* * * * *

One of the many nice things about living at MIT is that Stuff Happens
Here. Just down the street, for example, is the Frank Gehry-designed
Stata Center
([photos](http://web.mit.edu/evolving/projects/stata/images.html) ([my
favorite](http://www.figure-ground.com/travel/image.php?stata/0014)))
which hosts, among many other things, the MIT Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (LCS+AI Lab=CSAIL), the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C), Noam Chomsky, and so on.

The W3C happens to be hosting their [Technical Architecture
Group](http://www.w3.org/2001/tag/) meeting, where the Web’s biggest
minds come together to argue about such pressing issues as whether a URL
can be said to refer to a physical object, like a truck. Dan Connolly,
who might be considered the \#2 guy at the W3C (after Tim Berners-Lee,
the Web’s inventor, of course), saw that I was in Cambridge and invited
me to come over this evening.

When I got there he introduced me to fellow TAG members Norm Walsh (who
some readers may know as the DocBook guy) and Henry Thompson (author of
xsv) and we all headed to a pool hall. Tired from a long day arguing
about such weighty subjects, they tried to avoid talking about them,
which ended up meaning that they mostly talked about pool. I’d never
played pool before but in two games I was able to make one or two
half-way decent shots. I need to work on doing all the various things at
once.

Dan Connolly is very dismissive of my swearing off of competitive games.
“Oh, pool isn’t pool a competitive game?” he sneered to me in email. (To
be honest, playing was sort of a breach.) And when I described the
application process he grumbled about it sounding competitive. (It
wasn’t a game, though!) I assume it’s because Dan’s a social
conservative. While we were walking there someone suggested a union
picket line might just be an attempt to extort money and on the way back
there were grumbles about people who didn’t know well enough to pay off
credit card debts. (Why isn’t this taught in school? they wondered.)

After pool, we headed over to a restaurant just next door and ordered
food. Sitting in the little booth, as we talked about friends and food,
I realized how absurdly detailed TAG problems really are. Did Ma Bell
have a department that sat and thought about the meaning of a phone
number? A team to come up with recommendations about the uses of a
phone? Surely this is the only technology in history to have such
philosophical problems.

As we walked into town, Dan told us excitedly about the weekly CSAIL
hockey game, which I’d never heard of before. Then we parted ways and I
headed home and called my mom.


SFP: Fire Alarm
===============

June 16, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mitfirealarm)

* * * * *

One of the hazards of dorm life is that fire alarms are always going
off. At Stanford, here’s how it went the three or four times it happened
last year: an alarm would go off, I wouldn’t hear it because I was in my
room with my headphones on or asleep, eventually I’d notice or get woken
up, I’d throw on my pants and walk downstairs and outside, where a group
of kids would accumulate. After what seemed like an interminable wait in
the shivering cold, a fire truck would show up, the firemen would walk
inside and, after a couple minutes, walk out again. Then everybody would
go back into the building even though nothing was actually explained.

As it turns out, it worked much the same way here at MIT, except they
have a new high tech talking fire alarm in every room to recite a
paragraph of instructions — twice — before telling you to leave the
building. When I got outside, there were much fewer people (it is summer
after all) but and the fire trucks showed up much more quickly. And
there were two of them! And after that, some policemen in their blue
uniforms. And then, inexplicably, a gray MIT-logo van pulled up and a
bunch of fat guys in suspenders (but no uniform) got out and went
inside.

But still, no explanation.


The Immorality of Freakonomics
==============================

June 17, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/immoralfreaks)

* * * * *

As the hype around the book *Freakonomics* reaches absurd proportions
(now an “international bestseller”, the authors have been signed for a
monthly column in the *New York Times Magazine*), I think it’s time to
discuss some of the downsides that I mostly left out of my main review.
The most important of which is that economist Stephen Levitt simply does
not appear to care — or even notice — if his work involves doing evil
things.

The 1960s, as is well-known, had a major civilizing effect on all areas
of American life. Less well-known, however, was the immediate pushback
from the powerful centers of society. The process involved a great
number of things, notably the network of right-wing think tanks I’ve
written about elsewhere, but in the field of education it led to a
crackdown on “those institutions which have played the major role in the
indoctrination of the young”, as a contemporary report (*The Crisis of
Democracy*) put it.

The indoctrination centers (notably schools) weren’t doing their job
properly and so a back-to-basics approach with more rote memorization of
meaningless facts and less critical thinking and intellectual
development was needed. This was mainly done under the guise of
“accountability”, for both students and teachers. Standardized tests,
you see, would see how well students had memorized certain pointless
facts and students would not be allowed to deviate from their assigned
numbers. Teachers too would have their jobs depend on the test scores
their students got. Teachers who decided to buck the system and actually
have their students learn something worthwhile would get demoted or even
fired.

Not surprisingly, as always happens when you make people’s lives depend
on an artificial test, teachers begun cheating. And it is here that
Professor Levitt enters the story. He excitedly signed up with the
Chicago Public School system to try to build a system that would catch
cheating teachers. Levitt and his co-author write excitedly about this
system and the clever patterns it discovers in the data, but mostly
ignore the question of whether helping to get these teachers fired is a
good idea. Apparently even rogue economists jump when the government
asks them to.

Levitt has a few arguments — teachers were setting students up to fail
in the higher grade they would be advanced to — but these are tacked on
as afterthoughts. Levitt never stops to ask whether contributing to the
indoctrination of the young or getting teachers fired might not be an
acceptable area of work, despite being an economist, he never weighs any
benefits or even considers the costs.

Levitt, by all appearances, was not, like some of his colleagues, a
self-conscious participant in this regressive game. He was just a rube
who got taken in. But surely preventing others from the same fate would
be a more valuable contribution.


The Intentionality of Evil
==========================

June 23, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil)

* * * * *

[ **English** | [中文](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil.zh) |
[Deutsch](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil.de) ]

As children we’re fed a steady diet of comic books (and now, movies
based off of them) in which brave heros save the planet from evil
people. It’s become practically conventional wisdom that such stories
wrongly make the line between good and evil too clear — the world is
more nuanced than that, we’re told — but this isn’t actually the problem
with these stories. The problem is that the villains *know* they’re
evil.

And people really grow up thinking things work this way: evil people
intentionally do evil things. But this just doesn’t happen. Nobody
thinks they’re doing evil — maybe because it’s just impossible to be
intentionally evil, maybe because it’s easier and more effective to
convince yourself you’re good — but every major villain had some
justification to explain why what they were doing was good. *Everybody*
thinks they’re good.

And if that’s the case, then intentionality doesn’t really matter. It’s
no defense to say (to take a recently famous example) that New York
bankers were just doing their jobs, convinced that they were helping the
poor or something, because everybody thinks they’re just doing their
jobs; Eichmann thought he was just doing his job.

Eichmann, of course, is the right example because it was Hannah Arendt’s
book *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil* that is
famously cited for this thesis. Eichmann, like almost all terrorists and
killers, was by our standards a perfectly normal and healthy guy doing
what he thought were perfectly reasonable things.

And if that normal guy could do it, so could we. And while we could
argue who’s worse — them or us — it’s a pointless game since its *our*
actions that we’re responsible for. And looking around, there’s no
shortage of monstrous crimes that we’ve committed.

So the next time you mention one to someone and they reply “yes, but we
did with a good intent” explain to them that’s no defense; the only
people who don’t are characters in comic books.


Of Washington And Worcester
===========================

July 3, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/downhillbattle)

* * * * *

Stanford, California

It’s June 19. I’m still in school, in fact, I’m just dashing out of
class into the cab waiting outside. The Ford Foundation is paying for a
trip to Washington, DC for a meeting about Free Culture. I was initially
hesitant about going to the meeting and in fact getting there has been
quite a bit of a hassle — here I am at the airport and they claim they
don’t have my tickets — but I eventually manage to dash onto the plane
just in time to get to DC late that night, where I take a shuttle to my
hotel.

The next day I head out to get lunch and visit my friend Derek Willis
who has very kindly offered to give me a tour of his employer, the
*Washington Post*. But as I head out the door I hear a voice call from
behind me. “Aaron?” it asks. I spin around and there on the couch,
gleaming like a diamond among the hotel’s tacky chandeliers and mirrors,
sit three young kids — two guys and a girl — wearing stylish-yet-indie
clothes and holding skateboards. ‘Hey,’ says the voice, ‘it’s Holmes.
From Downhill Battle. These are my partners, Nick and Tiffiniy.’

* * * * *

Cambridge, Massachusetts — Present Day

“so, are you coming here? i really hope you will,” writes Tiffiniy. “ok,
i’ll come — let me check the trains,” I write back. Downhill Battle is
headquartered in nearby Worcester, an hour away on the train. I agree to
come by the next day, when I wake up early and pack a book and an
umbrella and head west to Worcester.

I arrive at the elegant train station and head downstairs and through a
ballroom being set up with tables. Outside I look around through the sea
of cabs and cars and once again hear a voice call my name. This time
it’s Nick and I dodge across the street to meet him. ‘Hey!’ he says,
embracing me in a hug. ‘Welcome to Worcester.’

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

The three of them, as it turns out, are just checking in. Having the
keys made is taking forever, for some reason. I wait with them and
follow them up to their room where they invite me to lunch. We look for
places to eat, eventually deciding on a Chinese place down the street.
Outside, it’s raining slightly and none of us have umbrellas. “Let’s
hoof it!” shouts Holmes as he takes off running. We all follow in close
pursuit: four young kids, running like maniacs in the rain.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

‘So this is Worcester,’ Nick says, as we drive past a large abandoned
outlet mall on one side and a big gray convention center on the other.
Nick drives me over to Tiffiniy’s place, which she shares with Holmes’s
girlfriend, who let us in. We chat quietly until all of the sudden a
noise comes running up the stairs, screaming into the room — Tiffiniy,
wide-eyed, coming in and hugging me. ‘You’re here! You’re here!’ she
shouts.

Tired, I smile a little weakly.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

We chat about technology and globalization — while they assure me they
agree with my politics, they can’t help but wonder whether there are
benefits to globalization. (My new strategy for discussing
globalization, which I haven’t actually gotten a chance to employ, is to
just repeat back whatever people tell me except replace globalization
with colonialism.)

I then head uptown to the *Washington Post*. Derek comes down to meet me
and sign me in. I notice that on the guestbook the last person to sign
someone in was political reporter Dana Milbank. Derek takes me up to the
*Post* newsroom, which looks just like it did in *All The President’s
Men* (not surprisingly because, Derek comments, the movie was filmed
here): a vast sea of gray cubicles with men in suits walking from one
place to another, surrounded by reams of paper (and now, of course,
computer terminals).

Derek, formerly a Congressional reporter, now works as the *Post*’s
research database editor, a job which has always struck a political geek
like me as a rather sexy position. As we walk to his area of the
newsroom, he points out the various other parts (‘oh, there’s Howard
Kurtz,’ he says, ‘that guy is always working!’). He introduces me to his
co-workers, one of whom tells me the most amazing story about facing
down a powerful politician with a pile of data he’d found by crunching
the numbers in his database. He points to a picture man being
frog-marched which sits above his computer. ‘End result was, this guy
went to jail,’ he explains. I can’t help myself from smiling widely — it
almost gets rid of by cynicism about journalism.

* * * * *

[image not found]
Holmes (L) and Nick of Downhill Battle\
*photo: William Huber/Mother Jones*

Holmes and Nick first met going to high school in Worcester. They soon
moved to a Masachusetts math and science magnet school at a local
university, where they met Tiffiniy Cheng and others. The group split up
to go to college but ever since then they’ve slowly been reassembling,
living cheaply in Worcester and spending their time fighting the abuse
of copyright law.

Their organization, Downhill Battle, first appeared on the Internet
scene with [iTunes iSbogus](http://www.downhillbattle.org/itunes/), a
vicious parody of the website for Apple’s newly-launched iTunes Music
Store. At a time when most copyright activists were painstakingly
careful to insist they opposed downloading copyrighted music and arguing
that the music industry should find a way to make downloading music
legal, the website’s opposition to one of the first moves in this
direction and its full-throated support of file sharing software was
nothing less than shocking. Here was someone not just saying what all
the kids were thinking, they were actually providing a pretty careful
intellectual justification for it. “iTunes is just a shiny new facade
for the ugly, exploitative system that has managed music for the past 50
years,” they wrote.

Downhill Battle continued to grow, launching sites like [What A Crappy
Present.com](http://www.whatacrappypresent.com/) (humorously warning
parents not to buy CDs), [Coal for
Christmas](http://www.downhillbattle.org/coal/), and [Grey
Tuesday](http://www.greytuesday.org/). And with the help of another high
school friend, programmer Nick Nassar, they begun developing
software-based websites like [Blog
Torrent](http://www.blogtorrent.com/), designed to make sharing files
through BitTorrent as easy as posting to a blog.

With little more than a computer in the attic of Nick’s parents’ house,
they became a major force in the Internet copyright debate. Cory
Doctorow lavished praise on their youthful humor and energy (“one of the
best, most effective group of copyfighters on the net, fast turning into
a MoveOn for the P2P wars,” [he once called
them](http://www.boingboing.net/2004/11/14/bountyraising_for_en.html),
“my favorite gang of take-no-prisoners
copyfighters[”](http://www.boingboing.net/2005/02/22/get_paid_to_write_co.html))
and Larry Lessig begun denouncing their “extremism” (the anti-copyright
analog, he argued, of those who think everything should be copyrighted
forever) in speeches, positioning himself as a centrist between such
extremists.

And Downhill Battle continued to grow, launching two more non-profits —
the Participatory Politics Foundation, which develops the kind of
political technology hacks in a way I once dreamed of doing myself
(current projects include [a Slashdot-style news site for
politics](http://theregular.org/) and [a website for tracking current
congressional legislation](http://opencongress.org/)), and the
Participatory Culture Foundation, which is [developing a Internet TV
platform](http://participatoryculture.org/) which will let anyone start
their own television network (delivered over BitTorrent) which can be
easily downloaded from a GUI player (Al Gore’s cable channel and the
SEIU, among others, have already signed on to provide content).

With the non-profits came actual funding — up to then, the thing was
funded by meager merchandise sales, savings, and living cheaply
(including living out of their parents’ houses and buying clothes from
the Salvation Army) — and stuff that seemed more like actual work:
giving presentations to funders, calling people to invite them to
provide content for the TV platform, and so on. No more dashing off web
pages attacking major media corporations, now it’s a long slog toward
shipping, all under the guise of professionalism. But it’s not like
they’ve started wearing suits or anything…

(And now they want *you* to [join
them](http://participatoryculture.org/jobs/)! What a sweet job that
would be…)

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

Tiffiniy’s friend is also visiting from Vermont this weekend and the
Tiffiniy decides to take us all on a little tour of Worcester. Worcester
is an odd city. It’s an hour away from Boston, yet it looks just like
part of the city, not a suburb. But despite looking like a city — blocks
and blocks of retail and business and things — the streets are
completely empty. And while it contains several colleges, it doesn’t
feel at all like a college town. And — and maybe this last part is just
the Downhill Battle guys — but everything looks like it’s from the 70s.

Tiffiniy’s apartment, for example, has old draped couches and tables,
sinks and stoves — even [the new
books](http://www.sevenstories.com/Book/index.cfm?GCOI=58322100956870)
have retro covers. And the first place Tiffiniy took us was an old
shopping mall where they considered buying office space (they needed a
place to invite bands, they claim) and the whole thing looks run-down
and wooden. Then we head to a hot El Salvadoran restaurant that
similarly seems like a throwback. And, of course, all of them dress in
retro clothes.

At the restaurant, Holmes shows up on his skateboard (also giving me a
hug) and getting really into the soccer match playing on the TV.
Holmes’s girlfriend mentions she’s getting a tattoo of a Jimmy Corrigan
bird on her arm (Holmes’s sister, I noticed, has the Tristero logo) and
Holmes asks me if I’ve read Jimmy Corrigan. ‘No,’ I reply. ‘Oh, you have
to,’ he insists. I say I want to, that I’ve read some of Chris Ware’s
other stuff and I really enjoyed it — in fact, I saw him do the most
amazing thing with Ira Glass. The whole table groans (with the except of
Tiffiniy’s friend, the other visitor). ‘Ira Glass is a such a jerk!’
they insist and I get into a long argument about Ira Glass, who I
actually really like, but they argue saps all political meaning out of
life.

‘The whole point of Ira Glass,’ Holmes explains, ‘is so that some yuppie
sitting in their car can listen to some sappy story about a girl who
lost their dog and think that now they’ve experienced what it really
means to live in America. The show makes no distinction between
whatsoever betweem whatever little yuppie bullshit their average
listener has to put up with and the real societal problems that face
America. Whether they’re talking about silly kid or about gun control,
it’s the same stupid background music, the same smarmy tone.’

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

American University is hosting the Free Culture conference (they’re the
ones with the Ford Foundation funding) and they’re ferrying us all from
the hotel to the campus in a series of cabs. Inside an innocuous-looking
building at the center of the AU campus, they’ve taken out a whole room
and done it all up with fancy lighting and real caterers.

I try to get around and chat. Colin Mutchler, an artist and and activist
who is hosting the discussion, made waves the past year with his [Free
Culture Tour](http://www.activefreemedia.org/tour/) in which he traveled
the country performing on the subject of copyright law and things like
Creative Commons. He repeats the presentation for us (it includes, I was
later told, a photo of me wearing a CC shirt to represent Creative
Commons — I noticed the CC logo but somehow missed the fact that it was
me wearing it!) and it’s amazing. For some reason, I find spoken word
incredibly powerful in a real, visceral way.

Afterwards, the apparently famed [DJ
Rekha](http://sangament.com/djrekha/) took over and the Downhill Battle
people cleared out some space and started dancing away, eventually
drawing others in to join them. I tried to but couldn’t shake my
self-consciousness.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

Back at Tiffiniy’s apartment, Holmes is carrying his girlfriend, who is
not feeling well, inside. Tiffiniy is hanging out with her visiting
friend and so I head with Nick to a place he calls “the collective”,
which sounds interesting enough for me to get in the car without asking
further questions. The collective’s full name, as it turns out, is
“Collective á Go-Go” and Nick explains that while his friend Jake is on
tour with his band, he’s staying in Jake’s room there.

As we drive Worcester becomes increasingly less city-like, its tall
blocks fading into strip malls and then disappearing altogether, leaving
houses surrounded by trees. Eventually we pull into the drive way of one
especially large house and cut the engine. As I step out, the first
thing that hits me is the overwhelming silence. The place is beautiful,
tucked into luscious green woods.

The house tries to be mostly self-sufficient. Water is taken from a
nearby reservoir but is heated by hand over a stove powered by firewood
which they cut to size themselves (the wood itself comes from a tree
removal service). In lieu of bathrooms, they run their own composting
process. They have a garden where they grow some food, the rest is
bought from local organic farms. Chores (of which there are a lot, Nick
says) are shared equally.

In fact, we’re here now to help chop firewood. Nick tries to show me how
to chop the wood down to size by hand with a thing that looks like an
axe (but blunter, Nick says). As you might expect, I’m terrible at it.
We eventually pull out the heavy duty wood-cutting machine, in which a
hydraulic piston pushes the wood through the axe blade. Even this is
something of a challenge, since the wood has a tendency to try to jump
up and get stuck and other such things.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

It’s surprising how few people I know at this party. People keep having
to explain other people to me.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

After chopping wood, Nick shows me around the collective. The garage
houses a full silk screening system, which is where they make the
Downhill Battle tees. Jake used to be in charge and then Holmes’s
girlfriend, who used to live here, begun helping out. Jake calls on the
phone and Nick talks to him for a bit, asking how the tour is going.

Inside, Nick introduces me to some of the other collective members and
they talk a bit more about Jake. And then, a thought hits me. ‘This
isn’t Jake *Berendes*, is it?’ I say. Nick looks taken aback. ‘You know
Jake Berendes?’ ‘Well, I know of him.’ ‘How?’ “My friend Leonard
Richardson is always making jo—” ‘Oh, you know Leonard! Wow, that’s
incredible.’ The fact that I knew of Jake Berendes quickly became the
most interesting thing about me and Nick eagerly told everyone.

‘Indeed,’ I said, ‘sometimes Leonard needs to [assure people that Jake
is a real person](http://www.crummy.com/2005/04/21/1)!’ ‘Jake doesn’t
sound like a real person?’ laughs a collective member with an air that
suggests sometimes Jake can be all-too-real. ‘Not the way Leonard tells
it,’ I reply.

[Aside: To discuss Jake Berendes would not only be going far beyond my
area of knowledge but also to delve into a strange world of [magical
realism](http://www.crummy.com/articles/jake_berendes_west_covina/),
[amateur music](http://crummy.com/music/), [nested
in-jokes](http://www.xorph.com/jake_berendes_west_covina/), [Repetitive
Electronic
Music](http://www.corleonerecords.com/catmore.asp?release=42 "Ordem E Progresso"),
and [giant squid](http://www.fujichia.com/stuffed/squids/). Not that
that’s a bad thing.]

Nick takes me up to Jake’s room. “Jake is the most creative person I
know,” Nick says. Every day he writes [a weblog
entry](http://www.fujichia.com/index1.html) and [makes a stuffed
animal](http://www.fujichia.com/stuffed), he writes numerous songs,
draws, makes posters, puts together zines, and on and on. It is truly
incredible. Nick gives me a CD to take home.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

The university kicks us out at what seems like an unreasonably early
hour and we head outside to wait in the cold for the cabs that are
supposed to take us back to our hotel. Nobody shows up for what seems
like forever until a stationwagon finally arrives. Desperate, we decide
to all pile in; the Downhill Battle people and me all lying together in
the trunk. Someone snaps a photo. “No rich metadata!” Holmes cries. ‘You
can post it but I don’t want it to be found by searching for my name.’

We realize, piled into the trunk of a cabbie’s stationwagon, that the
night is still young. We decide to ask the cabbie to drop us uptown near
some bars. I ask Holmes if they’re sure they want me along, but Holmes
is nothing if not accommodating and thinks we’ll be able to make it work
out. When the cabbie drops us off, Holmes stops someone on the street
and asks him if he can recommend any bars I might be able to sneak into.
‘Not a chance!’ says the guy.

Undeterred, we head to the first bar we spot. One of the Battlers has a
recently-expired ID whose photo looks a decent amount like me and I give
it to the bouncer. He looks at it for a second and then lets me in. The
actual battler holds back for a while and enters with the real ID soon
after.

It’s my first time in a bar and, like most such firsts, it is inevitably
disappointing. It looks much like any other restaurant. It’s quite
stylish, with globe lights and fake branches as plants. The waitress
takes some orders and the music pounds. We sit in a booth and chat with
our neighbors.

I first met Holmes at [a party hosted by Zack
Rosen](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001645) months ago. Zack, who
looked so at home when he was at a party…well, at home, now looks sort
of out-of-place, like I often feel at parties. Unfortunately he’s too
far to talk to.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

Back at Tiffiniy’s apartment, they’re inflating a new raft. We all take
turns getting lightheaded on hyperventilating over plastic fumes. We
throw the raft on top of the car, each grabbing a side, and drive to the
top of a hill overseeing a lake. Nick throws the raft onto the hill and
we take turns sliding it down (it’s not a very steep hill). We throw the
raft into the mud surrounding the lake. For a moment it looks like I’m
going to go with Tiffiniy’s friend, but this mistake is quickly
rectified and I hang back with Tiffiniy until its our turn.

The sun is setting and the lake and trees are all drawn in pale blues
and greens. The lake is like a shimmering mirror, the yellow raft
hanging in the middle. When its our turn Tiffiniy goes in first and I go
in after but end up slipping in the mud, falling on top of her, getting
water in the boat, and getting myself all swampy. We embark anyway,
using brooms brought from the apartment as paddles. The mood is slightly
ruined, as are my clothes.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

The law school graduate fighting medicine patents is rather obviously
hitting on Nick. ‘*Tell me your dreams*’, she says lusciously. ‘Well,
uh,’ Nick replies, stiff and nervous, ‘our group tries to fight, uh, the
expansion of, uh, copyright law by—’. ‘*No*’, she interrupts. ‘*Not the
group’s dreams — your dreams*.’ ‘Oh. Well, uh.’

We’ve left the bar and are now walking the streets in search of dancing,
although we can’t quite seem to remember the name of the place we’re
heading for. Captain something, perhaps? Oh, there it is. We try to pull
off the ID trick again, but we’re foiled by the \$5 cover charge. “Five
dollars!” someone exclaims. We head back to regroup. Law school girl
heads in to see if she can pull out a friend.

Her friend is a shortish snobbish fellow, with a manner that was the
subject of much derision but which is rather hard to describe. ‘Oh, boy,
there’s sure a lot of you. Well, uh, I could probably get you and you in
— who wants to actually get in? — yeah, you and you.’ He looks at me.
‘Sorry buddy, but there’s no way I’m gettin’ you in.’ Holmes decides
that maybe he doesn’t want in and we head home, joking about what a jerk
he was. ‘Please, you could get in,’ he assures me.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

Back at Tiffiniy’s apartment, they’re cooking up some dinner. I’ve taken
off some of my more swampy clothes, borrowing some of Tiffiniy’s pants.
Afterwards, we make plans to head over to a swimsuit-themed party. They
call up their friend programmer, who I will call Sam, and invite him to
come over. When Sam arrives, Nick suggests we discuss RSS, a prospect
which Sam is not particularly enthusiastic about (and, to be honest,
neither am I).

We apparently get to the swimsuit party a little too early, since nobody
has really arrived yet. We stand in a circle and talk for a bit with the
lights on and then mill about for a little while. Topics for
conversation are not particularly forthcoming. Sam tries to spark a new
one: ‘I spent the day rereading *Ender’s Game*,’ he suggests. This
sounds rather awkwardly geeky, but I can’t help but chime in: ‘Oh, I did
that once too! Just sat started looking at it and before I knew it I’d
reread the whole thing.’ ‘What’s *Ender’s Game*?’ asks one of the girls.
We’re apparently the only two who know.

Sam is clearly socially awkward so it doesn’t surprise me too much when
a little later he announces that he’s heading home. But it does surprise
the Downhill Battle folks. Word spreads that apparently Sam was asked to
leave, which strikes me as a little much. I mean, he obviously wasn’t a
party person, but to throw him out?

It turns out that things are much stranger than that. In fact, Sam’s
ex-girlfriend who broke up with Sam after cheating on him, is coming
over soon and apparently they don’t think he should be around for it.
Holmes thinks this is monumentally unfair and, he later tells us, he
seeks out the girl who asked Sam to leave and gets in her face. ‘Maybe
next time you could tell me in advance who I can and can’t bring to your
parties,’ he tells her.

‘I’ve been watching the OC a lot,’ he later explains, ‘and on that show
if someone has a beef with someone else they just go right there and
tell them. The Worcester scene’s too small for people to be having beefs
like this; it’s noxious. We just need to get this all out into the open.
We could have a Worcester beef wiki. You know, you’ve got to write up
everybody you’ve got a beef with.’

So at the party, he just kept staying on the girl, asking her why Sam
couldn’t stay and what the problem is and she repeatedly declined to
comment. ‘They’re never going to invite you back,’ someone comments.
‘Oh, I knew that,’ Holmes says. ‘I don’t care. I don’t want to go back
if that’s how they’re going to be.’

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

The Ford Foundation, foolishly, did not bring us all out here simply to
hang out and party. Instead, they’ve provided what I assume is the
standard summit garb: a long white U-shaped conference table with a
projector at one end along which we can type on our laptops while
sharing insights. Such sessions are certainly popular, but I’m not sure
how effective they (as opposed to the discussions outside them) really
are.

The last major one I went to was a alternative [music] compensation
system (ACS) meeting hosted by Harvard Law’s Terry Fisher. I took
copious notes of the discussion, which Terry suggested I not post on my
blog, but those don’t seem to have been worth anything and instead what
I remember is being snowed into the Sheraton Commander with Ed Felten
and Ernest Miller and friends.

One problem is that such events have rather unclear goals, like
“fostering discussion”. One can certainly have a conversation — two,
maybe even three or four, people talking to each other — and one can
have many such conversations. But one cannot have conversations
involving groups of twenty or thirty people, especially when the topic
is boring and the people are prone to speeches. It’s just doesn’t work.
The only useful part, as the participants will readily attest, is the
conversations in the hallways.

Still, you obviously want to go to such summits, if only for the
prestige and fun of hanging out with such cool people. And something
about such meetings seems to compress people, making them into more
concentrated coolness than normally. Hanging out with the amazing Ed
Felten at the ACS meeting led me to go home and apply to Princeton
(where he teaches) and, as we will see later in this story, hanging out
with the Downhill Battle people had a similar effect.

And so, I’m in something of a bind, since I want to get invited to such
meetings but I don’t really like them. So I can’t really talk about them
much on my blog. Nor can I tell the organizer what I really think about
them, although they always ask. And worst of all, I sort of tune out
during the actual meeting-part conversations which makes me shy about
speaking up lest I betray this fact, which in turn makes the organizer
regret inviting me. ‘I invited this Aaron kid because I thought he was a
genius,’ they say to themselves, ‘but he didn’t say a word!’ (As a last
ditch attempt to justify flying me out they try to pressure me into
saying something but I’m not very cooperative.) It’s all so sad.

* * * * *

Winnetka, Illinois — Ninth Grade

But perhaps not as sad as me at a party. In junior high and high school
we would routinely have what the school insisted on calling “socials” —
basically dance parties. I was practically alone in almost never showing
up and my classmates, who showed the same surprising social generosity I
see in the Downhill Battle Kids, went so far as to start bribing me to
come.

Even when I did come I mostly stood in the corner, perhaps twitching
occasionally, maybe talking to some people. During a slow dance a girl
finally grabbed me from the corner (perhaps even ditching her date) and
pulled me out to the floor, putting her hands on my shoulders, as was
the custom. I reacted, naturally, by putting my hands on her shoulders
but a within a few seconds noticed this was quite wrong and that all the
other men had their hands on either side of their partner’s waist, so I
quickly corrected myself. I still had no idea what to do with my feet,
but to my recollection I didn’t do anything incredibly stupid with them,
but I can’t say the moment was particularly enjoyable, seeing as how I
was gripped with fear the whole time.

Further bribes led me to try to participate in the bizarre actions that
seem to make up modern “dance”, which make my twitching look tame by
comparison. Dance has never really made a whole lot of sense to me, but
its modern version is surely especially odd, consisting as it does
mostly of people huddling close together and sort of writhing and
shaking various appendages in some vague relation to the music.

The worst thing about it, however, is that stupid as it is you can do it
poorly and look even stupider. And, as you might expect, falling from
such an already low level could leave one’s self-esteem at rather
perilous lows. So in dancing, one tries to keep a sense of just how
stupid one looks at this moment, in order to determine whether to cease
such activity. Unfortunately for one, however, it is precisely this
self-conscious monitoring that is the primary cause of poor dancing.

Worcester, Massachusetts — Present Day

Taking all this into account, I am sitting alone at a table in the
kitchen with a neckache while dancing grows in the other room and people
start smoking pot on the porch. Holmes, frustrated with the stereo
system, has commandeered it and attached it to an iBook and is now
downloading songs to play off a peer-to-peer network. Once he feels he
has sufficient songs queued up he comes over and sits down with me.

‘Are you OK with just sitting here?’ he asks. ‘Because I want to know if
I should pressure you to come join us and I know there are some people
who are just totally OK with who they are.’ I’m rather surprised at the
question and not really sure about how to articulate my feelings. ‘Well,
um,’ I say. ‘No, then. If you have any question about it, then the
answer is no.’ ‘Well,’ I finally say. ‘Right now, this person I am right
now, has no desire to go dancing. But I’m beginning to wonder if I
should be a different sort of person.’

This too apparently means no and Holmes drags me into the other room and
I slowly begin twitching again, expanding until I reach a range which
might be considered moderate dancing, which I still am not doing very
well at. Holmes and friends decide to liven up the party but running
into a mattress that’s laid up against the wall a high speeds, causing
them to bounce off of it and into the crowd. I decide to join in and
it’s the first fun thing I’ve done all night.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

One of the cooler groups here are the folks from Third World Majority
(website [cultureisaweapon.org](http://cultureisaweapon.org/), who
manage to combine some of the most radical rants with support for the
power of technology. The tech industry, as Thomas Frank superbly
documents (notably in *One Market Under God*), consists mostly of
radical politics as sham — letting 20-year-old kids run companies is
supposed to replace economic democracy — but TWM has radical politics as
extreme as anything I’ve seen.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

A dark-skinned youth in what I guess are called hip hop clothes enters
the party. He wasn’t invited, he admits readily, but he saw the noise
and decided to come by. Back in Illinois, I’d have to say, they’d
probably be trying to kick the kid out right about now, but these
Worcester kids just toss him a beer. Conversation with him is perhaps a
little strained, but there’s no overt tension.

He invites a few of his friends over (which is probably exactly what the
Illinois kids were afraid of) and while for the most part they associate
among themselves, nobody seems to mind them.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

Aside from the Downhill Battle folks, the coolest person here is Hannah
Sasserman of the [Prometheus Radio
Project](http://www.prometheusradio.org/). Prometheus, [profiled in *The
Nation*’s radio
issue](http://www.thenation.com/docprint.mhtml?i=20050523&s=karr),
started as a collective that started illegal “pirate” radio stations.
The group has lately gone legit, lobbying for the legalization of
Low-Power FM (LPFM) stations and building community radio stations
instead of pirate ones. Hannah is intelligent and articulate and
passionate and good at balancing the legal and illegal sides of her job.
“She’s definitely one to watch,” I wrote a friend afterwards.

A professor asks if some students can practice by filming us and Hannah
comments by saying something about them filming her ass. ‘It’s not
supposed to be X-rated,’ the professor explains. ‘Oh, don’t worry,’
Hannah replies. ‘My ass is not X-rated.’

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

Back at the Tiffiniy’s apartment, my neck still hurts, the pain crawling
up towards my head as it usually does. As the party went on people begin
taking off their clothes, revealing the swimsuits underneath (it was a
swimsuit party, after all). Even Holmes strips down to some
tight-fitting swimming trunks. Some of the girls even started swapping
swimsuits. I think I finally understand what Aimee Mann meant when she
sang “trading clothes and ringing Pavlov’s Bell”.

We left probably around probably 4am. (I remember I once was at a rather
geekier party and I was introduced to Miguel de Icaza. Miguel and I
really didn’t have all that much to talk about, so he started flipping
his sexy cell phone open and closed and telling me about the dance
parties he went to. Where he was from, he told me, the music didn’t even
*start* until 4am!)

I ask if there’s any aspirin for my head and they tell me that the
solution to headaches is to drink some water and eat stuff. I try this
but tell them that I don’t think it’s going to work and when I don’t
take aspirin in response to a neckache I generally end up waking in the
middle of the night with a searing pain tearing apart my skull. After
repeating this story several times in a rather subdued tone, they kindly
get some aspirin from the local 24-hour pharmacy.

Holmes arrives later and debriefs us about the night, giving the above
riff about the OC, which leads to a discussion about how things are much
better on television. ‘You know what else is good about the OC? The kids
just totally ignore the parents. You want to go visit someone? You drive
over there and next thing you know you’re in their bedroom.’ I suggest
that another good thing about the OC is that you get places instantly,
but Holmes assures me that the show’s realism includes actual driving.

Eventually we go to sleep — I’m allowed to use the bed out on the
glass-enclosed second-floor back porch.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

After the day’s long meeting we’re taken on a bus to a crowded fancy
restaurant. We’re stored in three tables up in the top floor’s corner.
At one point I have to go down to the bathroom and I swear it looks just
like the choreographed office number from *Brazil*: people in colorful
clothing go up and down the stairs, a waiter with a tray cuts in front
of me, a scenic view from the second floor over a crowded restaurant,
people pass pieces of paper back and forth in front of me, all while a
perfectly steady camera shot takes it all in.

Back at the table, I sit next to Tiffiniy. She says she’s not feeling
very well so she sort of slouches down in her chair quite a bit and to
keep talking to her I slouch down and do face the same way. While we’re
oblivious, someone snaps [a
photo](http://www.flickr.com/photos/activefree/15723535/in/photostream/)
and laughs and shows it to us. It looks like we’re swooningly in love.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

I wake up to the sun streaming through the glass ceiling. I get up and
spend an hour just sort of staring at my hands. Later I head in and we
go out to breakfast.

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

After dinner a fellow from the Consumers Union (nonprofit publisher of
*Consumer Reports*, although they’re actually much more political than
that would suggest) invites us over to his house, which looks a little
like the kind of old abandoned places that people throw wild parties at
in movies. He hasn’t been letting the place go to waste though — he
installed a large stripper pole in the middle of the living room.

Some loud music is put on and I head out to the back porch to escape it.
Holmes decides to take a seat and as water starts squirting out from
under him, he realizes he’s sat in a puddle. He takes off his pants and
throws them on the nearby barbecue, where they proceed to start
steaming. It looks like smoke, of course, and one wonders what the
neighbors think when they come out on their porch and observe us.

The Downhill Battle kids have brought their skateboards and we take
turns trying them, the more adventurous racing down the hill. Just the
driveway’s tilt is too much for me — things go too fast and I arch my
back and scrape my wrist and knee.

I hang out with Tiffiniy on the front steps for a bit and then she grabs
my hand and drags me across the street and over a fence, up some stairs
into this amazing urban meadow between two houses that’s been allowed to
run wild, grass growing tall and crawling up a defunct fountain in the
middle. ‘Isn’t this beautiful?’ she asks and indeed it is. After some
time we head back and some time after that she heads off with some
people to a bar. ‘Do you want to come?’ she asks and I do but I also
don’t want to cause trouble again so I stay behind and head back to the
hotel, looking at myself in the hotel’s many mirrors, checking out how I
look in the tight-fitting Downhill Battle tee they gave me.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

We pile into a place that looks like your typical breakfast diner,
ordering one and two dollar meals which Holmes pays for entirely in the
quarters he has in his pockets. Holmes asks me what sort of political
software I want to work on and I tell him that as I’ve radicalized I’ve
had trouble thinking of software radical enough to keep up with my
politics. ‘But projects don’t have to be explicitly political to have
political effects,’ he says. ‘Look at Wikipedia.’

‘Yes, look at Wikipedia,’ I say. ‘Wikipedia was founded by an
Objectivist and its policies are explicitly anti-truth.’ ‘Anti-truth?
Wikipedia’s policy is truth through process.’ ‘The Wikipedia [npov
policy
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view#What_is_the_neutral_point_of_view.3F)
explicitly says that it doesn’t matter whether something is true or not
— it can only be put on a Wikipedia page if it’s popular. And that makes
some sense from a certain perspective, but it’s certainly not political.
In a messed-up society like ours, neutral policies don’t have neutral
effects. The process will just reinforce the status quo.’

‘Does this really happen?’ ‘Sure, I tried an experiment. I picked one
page — the article on *From Time Immemorial*, a book that claimed there
were really no Palestinians — and tried to tell the full story, which
involved such shocking facts as that a journal article exposing the book
as a fraud couldn’t get published anywhere. My well-cited additions kept
getting deleted and when I asked why someone explained on the talk page
that what I was saying was silly — nobody rejects journal articles that
are accurate. Well this was precisely the point I was trying to argue
against!’

‘So what’s the solution? Does a wiki have to have an explicit political
point of view?’ ‘Well, that’s one possibility — one that I’m sort of
trying. But a simpler answer is to just say that instead of only
including things people believe, only include things you can provide
citations for. Require people to provide evidence for their claims.
That’s a much better way of getting truth and it’s much more useful too,
since people can get the cites to learn more.’

* * * * *

Washington, D.C.

The second day of the Free Culture meeting is much shorter and emptier.
Under pressure, I give a short talk on my radical wikipedia and,
shockingly, one of the people from Third World Majority comes up to me
afterwards to note that she’s actually used the site (which I haven’t
even told anyone about). And then I say my goodbyes (Tiffiniy says it
feels like the last day of summer camp) and drive to the airport with
Zack Rosen, get onto my plane, and fly back to California.

* * * * *

Worcester, Massachusetts

After breakfast, the gang takes me on a small car tour around Worcester
and then back to the train station. ‘This didn’t really work out the way
I expected,’ Tiffiniy says. ‘We’re not usually this social. I thought we
were just going to hold hands and walk around the city. You’ll have to
come back. Think of Worcester as your home.’ I thank them for their food
and beds and tight-fitting pants and party invitations and so on and
then head into the grandly architected Worcester station and onto the
train and back to Boston.

SFP: The Spirit Inside
======================

July 5, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/july4)

* * * * *

The sun has set leaving the street lights to cast everything in an eerie
yellow glow. People from all over the city leave their houses, joining
the growing mass that has taken over the streets carless streets. As the
group passes darkened empty buildings, old men stand by the side of the
road selling colored luminences. An orchestral soundtrack begins to fade
up.

As the group nears the river, the actual size of the proceedings becomes
apparent. The entire riverside and its attached street has become
inhabited, people bustling back and forth, setting up shop on various
patches of grass, laughing and talking. The orchestral score grows
louder, coming from a hulking monolith in the sky.

The tune becomes recognizable as the 1812 Overture, reaching its finale.
People begin to gasp and point to the other side of the river. ‘What’s
going on?’ asks Simon. Before I can reply light begins to shoot out from
the ground up to the sky, exploding in a luminous pattern that leaves
shards of fire and smoke lingering in the sky.

The music stops.

‘And that was the world-famous Boston Pops playing their signature
piece, the 1812 Overture,’ reports a perky female voice from the
loudspeaker. ‘And a little taste of the fireworks that are yet to come,’
adds the male. ‘In just a moment we’ll be joined by the national
audience, so stay tuned to the Boston Pops 4th of July Fireworks
Spectacular on CBS!’

Simon and I find a spot on the grass to sit down as the loudspeaker
encourages us to support our corporate and governmental masters. Members
of the military are praised for their service. (Even as popular support
for the war continues to dwindle, it’s comforting to see that at least
the major television networks will support our babykillers.^[1](#fn:1)^)
‘And tonight’s fireworks display is presented commercial free for the
first time through the generosity of Liberty Mutual. Why don’t you all
show how much you appreciate Liberty Mutual?’ asks the loudspeaker. The
crowd, who I didn’t even think was listening, loudly thanks Liberty
Mutual.

The orchestra prepares us for the show with a medley of American songs,
ranging from “Yankee Doodle Dandy” to “YMCA” (which we all do the hand
motions for, except Simon). Then, for the TV audience, they present [an
incredibly awful](http://www.ouramerica2005.com/) combination of
combination of country music, hollowed rhetoric, and false patriotism.

But soon enough the fireworks begin and they are indeed spectacular. I
can’t say I’m up on my fireworks but the show is much
better-choreographed and impressive than everything I’d seen at home.
The show lasted nearly half an hour with numerous tunes played, the best
being U2’s “Vertigo”, during which large cubes appeared in the sky
precisely as they counted off. I also saw smiley faces, supernovae, and
an odd sort of color package. Technology!

And then, our eardrums battered, the whole thing exploded in a finale
that lit up the entire sky. And then we all walked home. It’s nice
living just a block away from the most spectacular fireworks display in
the galaxy.

* * * * *

1.  I have no problem with the troops as people — I’m sure there as good
    as anyone — but it wasn’t the people that the media was supporting.
    They were suggesting the job itself was praiseworthy; it’s
    not. [↩](#fnref:1)




Help Wanted: Programmers for Startup
====================================

July 14, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/helpwanted)

* * * * *

Are you a good programmer? Willing to join a small startup? Think you
can get along with me?

We’re looking people to join out startup if it gets funded, possibly as
a co-founder. We’re building a web-based application.

Email me: [startup@aaronsw.com](mailto:startup@aaronsw.com).


Change of Course
================

July 16, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newethics)

* * * * *

Here on the Interblog, anyone can write whatever they feel like.
Unconstrained by standards and practices, bloggers feel free to write
anything that’s fair and accurate. For the past ten years, I’ve played
this sorry game — telling you when I thought my friends books sucked,
noting exactly which major media figures offered Schedule III Controlled
Substances to teenagers, and speaking frankly about sex. I have finally
seen the error of my ways. I plan to become [an online
magazine](http://www.thetalentshow.org/archives/001897.html).

No more will I defend saying something simply because it is “the truth”.
No, from now on, I am adopting the rigorous standards of professional
journalists. I’ve been convinced that telling people the truth will just
hurt them and, frankly, I’m a little tired of being mocked and shunned
for my honesty, which goes completely unappreciated by you people.

So, here’s the new regime.

1.  [Like all major
    newspapers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fact_checker), there will
    be no factchecking.
2.  [Like
    *Newsweek*](http://www.dissidentvoice.org/May05/Frank0526.htm), I
    will run any possibly unflattering stories by my subjects before
    publishing them.^[1](#fn:1)^
3.  [Like Bob
    Woodward](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/movable_type/2004_archives/001257.html),
    I will totally adopt the point of view of my sources in a piece,
    even if this means contradicting a previous piece.
4.  [Like Judith
    Miller](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A14777-2004Oct7.html),
    I will go to jail in order to protect a source who committed a
    crime.
5.  [Like Judith
    Miller](http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2004/05/27/times/index2.html),
    I will continue to insist my stories are true even when they
    obviously aren’t.
6.  [Like Ceci Connolly of the *Washington
    Post*](http://www.google.com/search?q=site:www.dailyhowler.com+ceci+connolly)
    and [Chris Vlasto of ABC
    News](http://archive.salon.com/news/feature/2000/03/06/hillary_clinton/index1.html),
    I will fabricate quotes and doctor audiotapes if it will help my
    political cause.
7.  [Like Elizabeth Bumiller of the *New York
    Times*](http://www.dailyhowler.com/dh032204.shtml), I will write
    complete puff pieces about people in power.
8.  Like practically everyone famous, I will provide glowing blurbs for
    books I’ve never read.
9.  [Like most news outlets](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001677), I
    will no longer try to provide facts about things and instead focus
    on personality.
10. [Like Robert Novak](http://mediamatters.org/items/200408300011), I
    will promote products from my friends and family without disclosing
    my association.

The fun starts tomorrow, with a glowing profile of Seth Finkelstein
(assuming he approves it, of course). But the first thing I plan to do
as a journalist is convene a panel on blogger ethics. Somebody really
needs to stop those guys before things get out of hand.

* * * * *

1.  I remember seeing a more detailed piece about this that included
    quotes from major media figures saying that Newsweek did the right
    thing in this case. I can’t seem to find it but if anybody else can,
    please let me know. [↩](#fnref:1)




Our Next Superjumbo
===================

July 20, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/superjumbo)

* * * * *

![Book cover](image1_superjumbo)The question seems rather less important
now, but for a while I was working on a book about politics, especially
how the Democrats could win elections. For those out there interested in
the question, Rick Perlstein (author of *Before the Storm*, the
highly-praised history of the rise of the Republican right) has written
what is pretty much the definitive piece on the subject, now in
paperback as *The Stock Ticker and the Superjumbo*.

In short: Perlstein recounts the strong evidence that there is very
broad support for the economic platform of the Democrats. Nonvoters,
independents, and even Republicans, he notes, support core Democratic
principles. They just don’t consider themselves Democrats, a party they
think of as not standing for anything in particular. This is, of course,
because Democrats have been busy chasing after the mirage of swing
voters, running further and further to the right, following the ball
Republicans are glefully pulling in front of them.

He argues that instead, the Democrats must build a strong and long-term
political identity, building a new political landscape instead of trying
to win on the old one, just as the right-wing Republicans did. Doing so
requires a openness to the possibility of losing, at least initially,
but in the end it is the only way to win.

This artless summary doesn’t convey the depth of Perlstein’s piece, so
if you’re interested you can:

-   [Read it online](http://www.bostonreview.net/BR29.3/perlstein.html)
    at the *Boston Review*, where it was originally published
-   [Buy the
    book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0976147505/coolbooks02/)
-   [Buy *Before the
    Storm*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809028581/coolbooks02)

More thoughts:

-   Boston Review: [Various responses and Perlstein’s
    rebuttal](http://bostonreview.net/BR29.3/contents.html)
-   Crooked Timber: [Market Making versus Market Taking in
    Politics](http://crookedtimber.org/2005/06/24/market-making-versus-market-taking-in-politics/)
    (feat. comments by Perlstein)

A final note: Why is all this uninteresting? Because the Democrats
aren’t paid to win elections. They’re paid to win policy for their
corporate donors. Policy that hurts those companies, however popular
with the public, simply will not be funded.

[image1_superjumbo]: image1_superjumbo.jpg

Serious Social Science
======================

July 21, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/socialscience)

* * * * *

I once attended a psychology lecture in which the speaker argued that
Freud was really a brilliant psychologist, but the field had passed him
by because of its “physics envy”. His specific example is perhaps easy
to mock, but it has resonance because the problem is a real one. [As
Paul Graham shows](http://www.paulgraham.com/resay.html), in general
physicists are smarter than social scientists. But (to use a Grahamism),
like kids trying to act adult, the social scientists end up emulating
the form of these fields but not the content. In other words, instead of
getting smarter, they play make-believe.

The first thing that comes is the numbers. Real science papers are
filled with tables and graphs and regressions on piles of data, so the
social scientists decide to do all that. In economics, they even go so
far as to start coming up with equations and proving theorems. Then
comes the technical language. Physics papers discuss the “gravitational
wave perturbations about a brane cosmology embedded in a
five-dimensional anti-de Sitter bulk” so the cult studs decide they
should be just as incomprehensible.

And then, in the headiness of this newfound power of *science*, grand
claims are made. As J. K. Galbraith writes (\_Annals of an Abiding
Liberal, p. 4): “It is the great desire of nearly all economists to see
their subject as a science too. Accordingly, and without much thought,
they hold that its matter is also fixed. The business firm, the market,
the behavior of the consumer, like the oxygen molecule or the
geologist’s granite, are given.”

This is not to say that there is anything intrinsically wrong with using
math or jargon or making grand claims. But to adopt these habits
reflexively is to put the means before the ends. Scientists do not use
math because it is complicated but because, for what they are doing, it
is effective. Their grand pronouncements become accepted because
(sometimes, at least) they are true.

Such complaints, among a certain sector, are truisms. But the conclusion
typically drawn with them is pure pessimism. Social behavior, they
argue, is simply too complex for us to ever make real progress in the
field. The topic is studied by idiots and charlatans because the
intelligent and honest can immediately see its impossibility. I do not
agree with such a view. In fact, I think it is only possible to maintain
it thru abject ignorance of what science really knows.

The vulgar postmodern critique of science argued that scientists had
become our modern priesthood: deified as “experts” they would make
claims about how the world worked, claims with just as much authority as
those made by religion in earlier times. And while such comparisons were
wrong, they did betray a truth: society has, for largely selfish
reasons, inflated the accomplishments of science beyond their actual
existence. (See R. C. Lewontin’s fabulous *Biology as Ideology* for
evidence of this theme, from a respected scientist.)

Scientists — even the hardest of scientists — fabricate data, fabricate
studies, fall prey to fads, and otherwise get things wrong. But more
relevantly, they just don’t know that much. We have very little idea of
how the body works; the pills we take are made through the bluntest of
means. We don’t know how to calculate very simple things, like the
dispersion of milk in a cup of coffee. The illusion that social science
is ineffective can only be sustained by ignorance of such
ineffectiveness of hard science. The upside of all this is that there is
hope for social science.

So what is to be done? For reasons beyond the scope of this article, its
unlikely that the existing disciplines can be reformed. Instead what is
needed is a culture of serious social science built outside the existing
systems of academia. Its work should be primarily outwardly-facing,
because that’s the important audience. This means clear writing (unlike
this article, perhaps) for public consumption. And it means compilations
of broad scope, instead of obscure monographs.

We can already see the beginnings of such a thing in the work by people
like Doug Henwood and Christian Parenti. But there is certainly much
more to do, including building structures to do the work in.

So that’s the other thing I’m thinking about.


Faces of Fame
=============

July 22, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/myface)

* * * * *

In his book [*Breaking the News: How the Media Undermine American
Democracy*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0679758569/coolbooks02/)
(a relatively moderate book, despite the title) James Fallows asks (p.
94):

> Why do [journalists] want to appear [on TV], when so many reporters
> make fun of the shows? … The most immediate payoff is the simple
> thrill of being noticed and known. Political-journalistic Washington
> functions much like a big high school, with cliques of the popular
> kids, the nerds, the rebels, the left-outs, and so on. To be on Tv is
> to become very quickly a cool kid. Friends call to say they’ve seen
> you. People recognize you in stores. Whether people agree or disagree
> with what you said (or whether they even remember), they treat you as
> “realer” and bigger than you were before.

I learned this weekend that I narrowly missed being on TV (CBS left me
on the cutting room floor — I knew wearing that *Democracy Now!* shirt
was pushing it) but I realized that as a prominent online journalist and
a new (media) online magazine I should try to capitalize on my existing
media power. So I’ve posted a photo on the sidebar, so that if any of my
many millions of readers happen to notice me on the street or in the
shop, they can behave as Fallows suggests:

> [One] hears from friends and relatives for weeks afterward, “I saw you
> on TV!” [Regular commentators] have that extra, sizzling experience of
> seeing strangers’ heads flip back, for a second look (“Is it really
> him?”) as they walk into restaurants or through airport corridors.

Of course, TV does have one big difference:

> In each case the recognition is almost entirely judgment-free … Print
> forces the reader’s attention past your personality to whatever your
> article is trying to say. TV’s effect is mainly to make you bigger
> than life. For each hundred acquaintances who will say, “I saw you on
> the show,” only one will say, “I agree [or disagree] with what you
> said.”

So, uh, if you happen to see me in a movie theater, or on an airplane,
or in the bathroom, or in your dorm room, don’t hesitate to shout, ‘HEY!
It’s Aaron Swartz! I saw you on the weblog.’ Here, I’ll help you out
with another picture:

[image link broken]

Heh, I almost put a picture of Blake Ross there. You would have fallen
for that wouldn’t you!

iCommons Summit
===============

July 26, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/icommons)

* * * * *

Saturday, June 25 — Harvard Law School Campus

After wandering around stupidly for about an hour, I see a crowd of
people outside the one door I didn’t bother trying to open (all the
others were locked). Yep, they’re definitely Creative Commons people.
There’s Hal Abelson, who seems not to recognize me. And there’s Mike who
says hi but then gets pulled away. I push inside and get a bottle of
water. And there’s Larry Lessig! ‘Wow, you look like you’ve lost a
million pounds,’ Larry says. ‘Is that true?’ ‘No, I don’t think I’ve
lost a *million* pounds,’ I reply.

I didn’t think that the way I looked would change much. I would always
be the little kid in the corner, the guy who definitely stands out. But
then I was looking at some old photos of me receiving the ArsDigita
prize and I realize I really do look rather different. Then I was ugly,
short, fat, awkward, and poorly-dressed. Now I’m taller and definitely
much thinner (although that seems to change), I wear better-looking
clothes, and my face has become rather handsome-looking, especially on
the occasions when I shave it. Now when I meet people they don’t
recognize me — they wait until I introduce myself or sort of stare at me
blankly before they realize who I am — that never used to happen before.

Anyway, I’m here to check out the iCommons summit. Creative Commons has
grown from a couple former students of Larry’s to a large international
“movement” (as all the speakers insist on calling it), the most
prominent members of which have been flown out to Harvard from around
the world thanks to Soros’s foundation. Charlie Nesson gives the day’s
closing keynote, describing his vision of an indestructible world
library.

We then retire to Charlie Nesson’s house, which is the typical sort of
cocktail party-type affair. When I’m not looking, Lessig gets pushed
into Nesson’s pool. ‘I believe this is the only area where it is
appropriate to say this,’ says one legally-trained guest, ‘but he was
asking for it.’

When I tell him that I’m out here to start a company, a descendent of
Robert Boyle (of Boyle’s law) offers to invest. ‘But we don’t have
anything,’ I insist. ‘That’s OK,’ he says, ‘I’m sure you’ll succeed at
some point.’

I spend most of the night talking to Mike Linksvayer, who I end up
walking back with, and we end up talking for hours outside the subway
stop, long into the night, long after the subway has stopped running, so
I buy a box of Cheerios and a bottle of water from a 7-11 and walk the
way back to my dorm room, listening to radical radio shows podcast onto
my iPod.

June 26

The phone rings. It’s my father. ‘Hi, I’m here,’ he says. ‘Oh. I forgot
you were coming. I was just going to see Lessig give a closing keynote.’
I agree to meet him on the way there and halfway between my dorm and his
hotel, there he is, smiling widely. My dad and I have not really spoken
in person since almost a year ago, when he used force and trickery to
prevent me from going to FOO Camp in a stupid show of power. He’s much
nicer now. I think he misses me.

As we walk and talk a kid in front of us keeps looking behind at me. At
first I think it’s something I’ve said, but he keeps doing it. Finally
he stops and says, ‘Hey, you’re that weblogger guy, right?’ ‘Yeah,’ I
say. ‘Aaron something. Yeah, I read your site.’ ‘Wow,’ I say. ‘Yeah, I’m
here for the Linguistics summer school. Maybe I’ll see you around some
time.’ ‘Maybe,’ I say hopefully.

I ask if my Dad wants to come with to Lessig’s keynote and he agrees.

I get to chat a bit with Ben Adida who, having been left with my legacy
of using RDF for Creative Commons found himself chair of the RDF-in-HTML
task force (quite possibly the worst job in the W3C — I should ask him
how he did it sometime) and, now discovering that overnight a major
competitor (Microformats, pushed by Technorati) has arisen, is trying to
get them to convert. I’ve been friends with the Technorati guys and I
take their position, telling Ben that it’s a hopeless endeavor. Ben is a
little shocked at this — I was the one who got him on the RDF train
after all — and pushes back. And eventually he manages to convince me
that it wouldn’t require hardly any additional work from the
Microformats guys to be RDF/A-compatible.

Joi Ito waves from behind Ben.

After Lessig’s speech, we head off and find dinner.


Simon Arrives
=============

July 26, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/simon)

* * * * *

Wednesday, June 22

I originally made a short-term reservation at Simmons Hall, both because
I had to get authorization for a longer-term stay and because I wasn’t
sure if I’d like it. I’ve already extended it once, but it expires
tomorrow, when my partner arrives (he also needs a room). I email the
house manager about staying. He says I should stop by. I go to his
office. He’s not there. I try back later, he’s talking to someone. And
so it goes throughout the day until he leaves. Uh oh.

I email him. He gives me a firm appointment in the morning. He can
extend my room through the end of the summer. ‘Thanks,’ I say. ‘Alright
then?’ ‘Actually, I have a friend and I was sort of wondering if he
could stay here too…’ ‘Oh, hmm, well, I need to keep a certain number of
rooms reserved just in case anything goes wrong, you know. I think we’re
pretty much out.’ ‘But what about that room next door to me? Nobody
seems to be living there.’ ‘That’s a double, not a single.’ ‘Oh.’

‘Actually, how about this?’ he says. ‘I’ll let you move into that room
and you can split it with your friend. How does that sound?’ This
Solomonic compromise is better than sleeping on the street or something,
so I agree. He marks me down in his book and gets me the key from the
desk. I move all my stuff over to the new room, which is like three
times as big as my old room, and nicely laid out too. I return the key
to the old room (stupidly, I guess) but I keep the door propped open so
we can use it if we need some alone-time. (Which indeed I do until my
partner gets us all locked out from it forever the first time he uses
it. Afterwards, I switch to using the time machine.)

At around 7:30pm there comes a knock at the door — my first here. I open
it and there’s a strange man I don’t recognize with a suitcase. ‘You
must be Aaron,’ he says. ‘Hi,’ I say. ‘I’ve got some good news and some
bad news. The good news is I cut our housing costs in half.’ ‘Wow, how’d
you do that?’ he asks. ‘Well, the bad news is it’s because we’re sharing
one room,’ I say and open the door onto our double. ‘Oh,’ he says, a
little scared.

Despite this humor routine, I’m a little scared too. Watching this
strange person move into my room is more than a little odd. I’ve always
been afraid of sharing space with other people. I almost thought of
dropping out of college if I had to share a room. At least this is only
for the summer. But it still seems odd. What was I thinking when I chose
to spend the summer with a random person based on little more than an
email and a flicker of name recognition. I didn’t even check references,
despite knowing one of the references. Why was I so stupid? I make a
note to check with that reference (which I never do).

Despite all this, it works amazingly well. Simon likes asking questions
and I like explaining things. We both enjoy our privacy and end up on
roughly similar schedules. Simon is a good, if not great programmer and
very open to being convinced he’s doing things wrong. In fact, Simon is
very open to anything. So open, in fact, that his openness is
practically the only frustrating bit about him. I can say the meanest
things to his face and he’ll just laugh and agree.

Our first big debate is about planning. Simon wonders why we aren’t
doing more planning. Shouldn’t we do use cases and draw up screenshots
and make a list of features and pick milestones and build a mockup
first? ‘Nah,’ I say. ‘Let’s just build it.’ This goes against what Simon
has been taught. ‘Planning,’ I say, ‘makes sense when you’re solving a
predefined problem or working for somebody who is defining the problem
for you. But it doesn’t make sense when you’re hacking. When you’re
hacking, as Paul Graham likes to note, you’re actually figuring out what
the problem is, exploring the problem space. It’s through writing the
code that you figure out what the code should do. You can’t plan that.’
Simon eventually comes to agree, although it takes him a while to get
rid of his instincts.

Even afterwards, he is still tempted to overbuild things. We needed a
permissions system, for example, and Simon build a super-advanced,
completely generalized database model for one so complicated that it
took up several pages of code. I spent a week trying to fix it up and
implement it before finally giving up, saying it was just too
complicated for me to wrap my head around. But he’s working on it.

I, meanwhile, have been struggling with my own demons — mainly
procrastination. Programming is an odd task in that it requires so much
mental discipline that your mind is often afraid of doing it. Worse
still is the fact that it happens at a computer, usually one with an
Internet connection, so there’s hardly any visible difference between
actually doing your work and running off to check your email or read the
news. It’s incredibly frustrating to snap out of a bit of newsreading
and realize you just wasted a couple of hours.

To combat this problem, I brought back an old application I wrote:
minuteminder. minuteminder unobtrusively pops up in the corner of your
screen every five minutes. When you get a second you can click on it and
tell it what you’re doing and it’ll log that with the current time and
go back and hide. The idea is that the combination of telling the
computer you’re really surfing the Web and seeing that you’ve been doing
so for the past 20 minutes will jolt you into waking up and heading back
to something more productive. It’s not a perfect solution, but I think
it definitely helps a lot. (A todo outline has been another productivity
lifesaver.)

Just having another person around is really nice, though.


Eat and Code
============

August 2, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/eatandcode)

* * * * *

Dear Diary: Sorry I haven’t written so long. Running a startup is
*hard*! That and finally having people to talk to sort of takes some of
the time and desire out of writing. I’m thinking maybe instead of a full
blow-by-blow account of what happened, I’ll write posts about different
topics, that will recap the story so far. My first attempt follows. -ASw

Life seems so incredibly overworked and overcomplicated that you pare it
down to the bare essentials: eat and code. Surely you should be able to
handle this without distraction. Unfortunately, it’s not so easy.

* * * * *

Let’s take eating.

To be honest, I’ve always had a problematic relationship with food. I
always liked plain things — the year before college I lived mostly off
of eating plain, microwaved bagels. At oriental restaurants I would
always just order steamed white rice. Wes Felter, noting I would
apparently only eat white food joked, referencing a Science Fiction
novel, that I would eat light bulbs, but “only the white ones”. This
reached its extremes at a World Wide Web conference where all the food
was white, even the plate it was on. Tim Berners-Lee later pulled my
mother aside to share his concerns about this diet.

Finally, one day at an oriental restaurant by Stanford (years before I
went to school there), we had the typical discussion except this time
Cory Doctorow spoke up: ‘are you sure you’re not a supertaster?’ he
asked. I had heard the They Might Be Giants song but never considered
the possibility. I thought about it as the conversation continued and it
seemed to make sense to me. [At this point I imagine a crane shot
lifting up and up over the conversation at the restaurant. Fade to:] I
did some research on the Internet and did the test (which formally
consists of putting blue food coloring on your tongue, taking a piece of
paper with a three-hole punch, placing it over the tongue and counting
the number of taste buds in it) and indeed, I am a supertaster. This
hasn’t eliminated the discussions about my eating habits, but it does
shift the blame.

In any event, I’m not one for the fine arts of cooking. So it’s always
seemed attractive to me to have a simple food that tastes decent that I
can just pull out and eat whenever I want. And, lo, it appeared that I
had found it: Cheerios. Cheerios claimed on the box to be healthy, they
had little in the way of taste, I could eat them whenever I want, they
had big boxes of them at the corner grocery store — everything seemed
great. Cheerio boxes piled up in the corner. (Photo to follow.)

There were some problems, though. I didn’t eat them with water or milk,
which meant that a fine Cheerio dust went everywhere. This dust was so
fine that it got into invisible cracks in my laptop’s surface and
apparently bonded with the metal and had to be scraped out each time I
ate. And then I begun to discover that the Cheerio dust was also into my
system, possibly even my lungs and giving me some Cheerio form of
silicosis; they made it difficult to breathe deeply. ‘Wouldn’t it be
ironic if I died of pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis?’ I
asked Simon. (I chose pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis as a
spelling word in 6th grade.)

At the same time, I was suffering from bouts of acid reflux which
continued to grow in frequency and severity. First just some acid. Then,
one night walking back from a Noam Chomsky lecture, I began to cough of
what felt like my stomach lining. I gave up the Cheerios but it didn’t
help. Last night I threw up my entire dinner.

And then what do I eat instead? We go for regular meals at 12 and 6 but
I’m only sporadically hungry and the food is getting boring. In Science
Fiction stories, we imagine small packets of food that are healthy but
taste like whatever we enjoy. Forget that, I’d be happy with just
packets of food that are healthy. I’m sick of having to worry about
food.

* * * * *

And then there’s programming. When I’m feeling good, I’ll have bouts of
just amazing productivity, doing everything that needs to be done in
hours. The only problem is that these good days are followed by a week
of bad ones, where I feel tired or depressed or scared and can’t quite
force myself to sit and face the code.

I used to think this was just cowardice, that I just needed to sit down
and program and I’d get the same level of productivity again. But what
if this is some serious limit in my brain? What if programming takes so
much out of me that it takes days to recharge? I’ve never seriously
considered this possibility before, but it’s not just fatalism — it has
real implications for how I should structure my days.

The last time I was fighting procrastination I was watching a bunch of
good television shows. And as part of this, I would read Tim Goodman,
the Roger Ebert of television critics. I was struck to learn one day
that even Tim Goodman, whose job was to literally sit down and watch TV,
could not bring himself to accomplish this task. I mean, I knew all
about [Structured
Procrastination](http://www-csli.stanford.edu/~john/procrastination.html)
but surely it had its limits. How could someone procrastinate sitting
down and watching TV? And yet, here it was before my eyes — my favorite
television critic, a hardworking and thoughtful man who had even spent a
column answering a question I sent him, even though I lived in Chicago
at the time.

The lesson I drew from this is that the human mind is such that whatever
you do, it will try to avoid it. So you might as well aim high. Now the
question is: what do you do with the rest of time?


Behind the Rant: Maciej Ceglowski
=================================

August 8, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ceglowski-interview)

* * * * *

As a noted Internet pundit, I have spent years suggesting that the
future would be so bright if everyone worked on my pet project. In
particular, I have argued that the Internet needs serious, well-written,
critical investigations into societal phenomena. Now Maciej Ceglowski
has shown just how right I am. Ceglowski, who in addition to being a
brilliant ranter can also [paint](http://www.oiloncanvas.net/),
[program](http://cantbedone.org/), and [act as some sort of unspecified
nonprofit
functionary](http://www.idlewords.com/2004/10/these_little_town_blues.htm).
In a brilliant and detailed piece entitled [A Rocket to
Nowhere](http://www.idlewords.com/2005/08/a_rocket_to_nowhere.htm)
Ceglowski takes apart the manned space program with an elegance and
completeness not seen since Christian Parenti wrote for *The Baffler*.
How did this feat come about? I sat down with Ceglowski over email to
discuss it.

*Aaron Swartz: The Weblog:* You’re a ranter (in the best sense of the
word) more known for your pieces about technologies and technologists,
like your [audioblogging
manifesto](http://www.idlewords.com/2004/08/an_audioblogging_manifesto.htm),
than for social criticism. What led you to a piece about manned space
flight?

*Maciej Ceglowski:* I don’t think a rant about space flight qualifies as
social criticism. There are rockets involved, after all.

What provoked me in this case was the hype about the “Return to Flight”,
along with a series of NASA statements suggesting that the Shuttle was
safer than ever. And there is something fascinating about the completely
reflexive nature of this mission. Trash collection aside, the only point
of the flight is to see whether things that break on the way up can be
fixed in time to come down.

*ASTW:* Did you have any previous background in the subject?

*MC:* No. I wrote a small shuttle rant two years ago after the Columbia
investigation, and I was a space geek growing up like everyone else.

*ASTW:* Your article shows a withering level of understanding of the
program in all its many facets. What was your process of research?

*MC:* here is an enormous amount of space-related material online, a lot
of it highly technical. Many space geeks are web geeks and take the time
to scan strange old articles, transcribe stuff, and create obsessive
websites. NASA also puts up a lot of interesting documents. This makes
it particularly easy to find good information on the space program,
including far more incisive critiques than the one I cooked up.

*ASTW:* How long did the whole thing take? Did it interfere with your
[busy schedule of
unemployment](http://www.idlewords.com/weblog.07.2005.html)?

*MC:* I collected links for a month and then pooped out a rant. Most of
my limited active time is spent [painting](http://www.oiloncanvas.net),
but the oppressive heat provided a good excuse to stay home and read
Shuttle links instead.

*ASTW:* In the article you write that, “Future archaeologists trying to
understand what the Shuttle was for are going to have a mess on their
hands.” What do you think future archaeologists will think when they
search the text of this era for comments about the problems of future
archaeologists? Do you think they’ll find such results genuinely helpful
or more of a rhetorical concern?

*MC:* I think future archaeologists will be digging through 30 meters of
ice with a sharpened stick, looking for canned goods.

*ASTW:* Already your article seems rather popular. Do you see yourself
doing more such work in the future?

*MC:* I’m sure I’ll continue emitting sporadic essays, I like to write
and I enjoy getting attention.

*ASTW:* What do you see as the larger place for such writing? In an era
of generally superficial science reporting, largely uncritical
magazines, and endless technical jargon, wouldn’t you endorse my
hobbyhorse?

*MC:* People need to stop wasting their time surfing the web and get
back to work. That means you too, startup boy - coffee break is over!

*ASTW:* Often while reading someone or about something, you feel like
there’s something wrong but you can’t quite put your finger on it. As
one of the Internet’s most noted ranters, you don’t just put your finger
on it, you put your finger all the way through it and twirl it around
for good measure. By clearly articulating a problem, one would think you
might have more effect than people who vaguely complain about it, but
does that effect ever reach nonzero?

*MC:* Well, twirling the finger is just good manners. As for nonzero
effect, I don’t think the NASA administrator is going to read my weblog
and scrap the International Space Station any more than I thought Paul
Graham would stop writing online essays after [Dabblers and
Blowhards](http://www.idlewords.com/2005/04/dabblers_and_blowhards.htm).
The point of the exercise is to offer a little mental release to people
who get as annoyed as I do, but lack the time or energy to spell out
why.

*ASTW:* Have you thought about writing for some more formal publication
or submitting your stuff to something like *Harper’s* or *The Baffler*?

*MC:* Writing popular online essays is like being the prettiest girl in
Scotland - satisfying on its own terms, but you can’t let it go to your
head.

If you look at a publication like the New Yorker, there’s a dearth of
articles written by guys who sit around reading web links in their
underwear, and a profusion of articles by people reporting from remote
places, or speaking to anonymous sources they’ve cultivated over a
lifetime of careful journalism, or deploying vast reserves of wit and
erudition against a topic they’ve studied carefully. It all just sounds
like work.

*ASTW:* Thanks for sitting down with us.

*MC:* Thanks for emailing me this template.


FOO Camp
========

August 25, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/foo3)

* * * * *

I was recently excited to be invited to FOO camp, where all the leading
figures of the modern technology industry shared their deep thoughts
with me. Having already started a successful startup, I decided this
year it was time to give back to the community, so I did some one-on-one
consulting with future entrepreneurs.

Here’s a photo of me listening to a pitch from up-and-comer Ada Norton
about the layer architecture of her new Fish-on-Puppies web application
framework. Definitely one to watch — I’ve recommended that Y Combinator
invest immediately.

[![Ada Norton pitches her
idea](image1_foo3)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/quinn/12876975/)\
([more
photos](http://www.flickr.com/photos/quinn/search/tags:Aaron%2CAda/tagmode:all/))

I generously gave [Ada](http://www.livejournal.com/users/dailyada/) a
20% discount off my normal consulting fees, in exchange for 10% of the
company. I hope that other entrepreneurs will follow my lead in
generously giving back to the community.

[image1_foo3]: image1_foo3.jpg

Reflections on Cultural Fragments
=================================

August 26, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cultfrags)

* * * * *

**Six Feet Under’s final episode:** After the second-to-last episode of
*Six Feet Under* aired, I was having lunch with my partner Simon. ‘I
wonder what they’ll do for the last episode,’ I said. ‘Obviously they’ll
have to kill everyone off, but how? Ooh! Maybe they’ll make the house
collapse. Then they could have these cool shots of everyone being
crushed as everything is shaking and falling down.’ I thought about that
for a second.

‘No, that’s not really their style,’ I concluded. ‘Instead they’ll
probably have flash-forwards showing how everybody died. And they’ll
sneak them in as flashes cut with present-day stuff. They’ll probably
shoot the episode from the point of view of some new character who will
walk around and whenever he meets someone, they’ll have a flash-forward
and show how that person will die. Oh, and get this: the new guy? He’s
played by Alan Ball.’

Well, I was pretty close.

Everyone else seemed to like the final episode of *Six Feet Under*. I
found it merely disappointing. It was just like the boring parts of any
other episode, only longer. Where was the heightened drama? The pathos?
The raw emotions? Whenever Alan Ball previously did an episode, it was
something special, much better than usual. Has the rest of the team
gotten so good that when Alan Ball takes over now, he ends up with
something worse?

I believe it was Jason Kottke who said that this was the first series
finale that made him cry and left him missing the characters for days.
Someone needs to buy him a copy of *My So-Called Life*.

**Michael Penn’s latest album:** Michael Penn is married to Aimee Mann.
Their musical styles are practically the same, except for their genders.
And this year, they are both releasing concept albums telling stories
about characters in the past. ~~So it was disappointing to discover that
Michael Penn’s music is so much worse. The work on his latest album,
*Mr. Hollywood Jr., 1947*, sounds about as immature as the songs on
Mann’s debut, *Whatever*.~~ Penn’s first track, [Walter
Reed](http://toolshedmedia03.com/ts/michael-penn-walter-reed.mp3), is
~~the only song that approaches Mann’s modern skill~~ definitely the
best.\* Fans who want a male Aimee Mann are better off with her old
boyfriend, Jon Brion.

Mann’s latest album is *The Forgotten Arm* and I finally figured out
today what in the story that title refers to. Reviewers have apparently
criticized the album for not having any stand-out tracks, but that seems
like a bizarre criticism because practically every track on the album is
a stand-out. I recall the same bizarre crticism being leveled at the Jon
Brion version of Fiona Apple’s *Extraordinary Machine*, which remains a
work of genius even if Fiona doesn’t think so.

\* I was far too harsh on Penn. After listening to the album a couple
times more, it’s a very interesting work and deserves to be judged on
its own merits.


Narcissism Notice
=================

September 16, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/narc)

* * * * *

Wired News: [Stars Rise at Startup Summer
Camp](http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,1282,68710,00.html)

> Though he’s only finished a single year at Stanford as a sociology
> major, Swartz said it is “looking likely” he will take some angel
> funding and not go back to school this fall.

Hartford Courant: [Keeping It Really Simple: RSS News Feeds Via E-mail:
A Technology That Actually
Delivers](http://www.courant.com/technology/hc-techlede0915.artsep15,0,6400858.story?coll=hc-headlines-technology)

> Aaron Swartz, co-author of an early version of the RSS computer
> language and author of the rss2email technology that delivers
> newsfeeds via e-mail, says RSS has offered a sense of empowerment
> absent from the Net surfer’s previous hunt for distinctive voices and
> viewpoints.


Paul Graham is Wrong
====================

September 21, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong)

* * * * *

I really enjoyed that essay by Paul Graham. Paul Graham is an excellent
writer and a very nice fellow. But when he said that thing that made me
look bad, I just had to draw the line. For years, I’ve been doing
something and telling people I’m doing it and then all of a sudden Paul
Graham comes along and tells me it’s a bad idea. I think it’s time to
question his assumptions.

In his essay, Graham writes:

> Most people in this situation typically do this thing. But what if
> they did this other thing instead? This idea typically doesn’t occur
> to them for that reason. But if they did what I suggest, they’d be
> like a metaphor instead of a simile.

Here’s where Graham really goes off the rails. What if we don’t want to
do what he suggests? Graham never considers that possibility. He just
assumes that he’s right.

Once, in an interview, Graham was asked what he thought about this
subject:

> *Q: What do you think of people doing that thing?*
>
> Well, you know, historically people really haven’t done a lot of this
> thing and going forwards I see a lot more of this thing happening
> because the things that have stopped people from doing those things no
> longer exist. This could really change things.

But this is absurd! Just because people *can* do that thing now doesn’t
mean they’re going to.

For too long, Paul Graham has gotten a free ride by saying things that
disagree with people’s prejudices in an informative and entertaining
manner. That was fine when all we had to do was link to his article and
read it. But this time he’s gone too far: he’s said something that might
actually make me change how I behave. And that’s unacceptable.

* * * * *

[gernika writes](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong#c9):

> A satire worthy of Swift :)

[Sencer explains](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong#c10):

> Paul Graham has always written the way he has written. That (among
> real reasoning) includes making assertions and peddling his own views
> as a kind of fact. The same people that are applauding Graham for
> “brilliant reasoning” when he makes assertions that fit their
> world-view, criticize him for the absurdity of even making assertions,
> when they don’t fit their world-view. Not that they shouldn’t, but the
> inconsistency is just funny in an ironic kind of way. :)

* * * * *

[In support](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong#c4):

> I’m so glad that someone stood up to him finally. Some of what he says
> at such as about Amateurs is a bunch of bull crap. […] Paul Graham is
> not “god” and some of what he says really ought to not be left
> unchecked and thank you Aaron for having the guts to stand up to him.

[In opposition](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong#c11):

> err what is the point of this? You establishing a reputation and
> personality off the back of Paul Graham? Man, you’re pretty shameless
> and petty. You think you’ve stumbled onto a gold landfill by realizing
> you don’t agree with Graham? How many millions of people have read a
> paul graham essay? […] Graham backs up his word with some good thought
> and informed opinions. YOU??? what do you base it on? the need to get
> noticed?


The Republican War on Science
=============================

September 24, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gopwar)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_gopwar)](http://www.chriscmooney.com/graphics/GOPWar3.jpg)

Science, we imagine, is the realm of objective disinterested geniuses
reporting back the findings from their expensive equipment, telling us
truths about the world. Politics, on the other hand, is seen as the
place for sleazy and corrupt jerks who lie to us in everything they do
and try to make everything fit their existing worldviews. So is it any
surprise that when the two things meet we’re in for a show?

Journalist Chris Mooney has made a name for himself by writing magazine
articles that make this intersection, especially under the Bush
administration, entertaining. He’s recently released his first book,
*The Republican War on Science*, which tries to combine the various
individual stories into a damning case of science politicization. The
book tackles a variety of subjects, including:

-   global warming
-   nutrition guidelines
-   fishing regulations
-   evolution
-   embryonic stem cells
-   safe sex

Each one gets a chapter written in the style of a magazine article
(indeed, many have been published as magazine articles), opening with an
interesting person or event and expanding to show how a group of Bush
backers (drawn from major industry and the religious right) have
concocted their own psuedoscience in an attempt to spread confusion
about the truth, with a particular focus on its effects in Washington,
where Mooney is based. Mooney bookends these stories with some more
general thoughts about the relations of conservatives and science.

The book has been something of a surprise success, recently making it
onto the *New York Times* bestseller list, and Mooney has been busy
doing a book tour for it. I went to see him when he spoke just down the
street at Porter Square Books and talked to him a bit afterwards as he
signed my copy. The audience was interested and engaged. I suspect a lot
of it was typical anger at the Bush administration (or “the neocon
radicals up in Washington and the media” as the angry sort who call in
to radio shows and so on always seem to put it), but I think this
particular issue strikes at the heart of people’s dislike for the
administration: the administration refuses to go along with reality,
even in its most pure form.

The book itself is a respectable and highly readable (I went through it
in a day’s free time) piece of work, although I could not help but feel
a little disappointed. In an apparent attempt to gain respectability,
Mooney adopts a detached journalistic — almost legalistic — style. While
Mooney doesn’t pull any punches factually — he will call a lie a lie and
refuses to be pulled into the trap of equating conservative science
abuses with liberal ones — such a style lacks the verve of Mooney’s more
strident online writing, such as when he wrote about Michael Crichton’s
global warming denialist novel *State of Fear*:

> Let’s face it: Such writing is pure porn for global warming deniers,
> in much the same way that fictional accounts of UFO abduction skeptics
> converting into true believers titillate UFO fans. […] By the book’s
> end, one can only ask: What planet is Michael Crichton living on?
> Because this one is clearly getting warmer.
> ([cite](http://www.csicop.org/doubtandabout/crichton/))

By comparison, Mooney’s book-long exposé of numerous indidents of Bush
administration distortion and dishonesty concludes more like this:

> these considerations all suggest science politicization has reached a
> nadir with the Bush administration […] Considered this way, Bush
> administration abuses and distortions of science come to look more and
> more like a large-scale political strategy. (241f)

And despite Mooney’s attempts at moderation and fairness, he hasn’t won
any favors from the press. *Publishers Weekly*, in a favorable review,
called it “very readable, and understandably partisan” while the
*Washington Post* attacked it as “surprisingly unconvincing”,
“polemic[al]”, and “a kind of conspiracy theory”. Since the mainstream
was apparently ready to consider the book partisan no matter the style,
Mooney probably would have been better off writing a little more
strongly.

But what about conservative readers? At the book signing, someone asked
Mooney if he thought the book would reach them. Mooney doubted that any
of the relevant politicians would actually read it. ‘But, you know,
maybe someone will say to them, “Things have gotten so bad that there’s
now a book claiming we’re at war with science!”’ he said. ‘Maybe that
will have some effect.’

[image1_gopwar]: image1_gopwar.jpg

Serenity
========

September 24, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/serenity)

* * * * *

[![Movie poster](image1_serenity)](http://www.serenitymovie.com/)

So *Buffy* ran its course, *Angel* got canceled, and *Firefly* saw its
untimely demise. But all is not over for Joss Whedon — *Firefly* is
back, this time in the for of the feature film
*[Serenity](http://www.serenitymovie.com/)*. Along with the rest of the
diehard Joss Whedon fans, I’m on the edge of my seat. By all accounts
the film is going to be amazing.

In this time of increasing polarization between left and right
blogospheres, of [endless politically-tinged cultural
crticism](http://alicublog.blogspot.com/), it’s more important to see
some pop culture we can unite behind. That’s why it’s nice to see that
[the leading blogs of the
right](http://instapundit.com/archives/025717.php) and [those of the
left](http://www.talkingpointsmemo.com/archives/week_2005_09_18.php#006614)
can get behind this film, with impressive marketing finesse. Here’s how
the film is described:

> Joss Whedon, the Oscar — and Emmy — nominated writer/director
> responsible for the worldwide television phenomena of *Buffy the
> Vampire Slayer*, *Angel*, and *Firefly*, now applies his trademark
> compassion and wit to a small band of galactic outcasts 500 years in
> the future in his feature film directorial debut, Serenity. The film
> centers around Captain Malcolm Reynolds, a hardened veteran (on the
> losing side) of a galactic civil war, who now ekes out a living
> pulling off small crimes and transport-for-hire aboard his ship,
> Serenity. He leads a small, eclectic crew who are the closest thing he
> has left to family — squabbling, insubordinate and undyingly loyal.

I can’t tell you how thrilled I am to have managed to nab two tickets to
a preview screening here in Boston! The place is practically alive with
buzz over this thing — family, friends, random folks at parties are all
talking about it. I’ll be sure to tell you all about how great it was
after I see it.

For more information, including the trailer, check out [the *Serenity*
website](http://www.serenitymovie.com/).

[image1_serenity]: image1_serenity.jpg

Serenity: A Review
==================

September 29, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/serenity2)

* * * * *

Joss Whedon’s film *[Serenity](http://serenitymovie.com/)* comes out
tomorrow, the first new episode of his series *Firefly* in years. Go see
it; you won’t be disappointed. It’s almost certainly Joss’s best work
yet — mixing storyline tricks with biting humor with amazing battles and
beautiful surroundings. The cinematography, special effects, and music
are all grand. But most importantly, it’s just really, really fun.

I received a “press pass” as part of the “Serenity Blogger Bonanza” —
they invited bloggers to come see a free preview if they promised to
write about it. (My companion thought this seemed rather risky — what if
a bunch of opinionated bloggers all give it bad reviews?) They also
invited blog readers, but then they claimed that all the screenings were
full — I actually received a rejection letter — yet when we went to the
theater they were handing free tickets to people walking by on the
street and the theater wasn’t anywhere near full.

Still, it was a good turnout and full of fans. The person to my left
said she’d already seen the film twice (they previously did previews
without finished music and so on for hardcore fans) and planned to go to
the real premiere (her fourth screening) dressed as one of the
characters. But while the movie fits in perfectly with the story of the
TV series (I was surprised; I would have thought the studio would demand
changes (actually, I can’t recall of the space battles were silent like
they were in the TV show (sound can’t travel in space, of course))), one
need not have seen the TV series to understand or enjoy the film. In
fact, while the trailers mention Buffy and Angel, they don’t mention
Firefly at all.

It seemed like everyone there loved the film. As we left, my companion
commented, still in awe, “I can see why they let the bloggers into see
it.”


David Lynch and Vedic “Science”
===============================

October 5, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dlynch)

* * * * *

I was recently offered a free ticket to see David Lynch give a talk at
Emerson College. The talk was titled “Consciousness, Creativity, and the
Brain”. I didn’t know why a movie director would have any particular
insights on these subjects but I decided that at the least it would be
amusing.

The talk was held in a huge and beautiful theater in downtown Boston,
ornate with two large balconies and, from where I was sitting at least,
largely full. We were all handed free DVDs on the way in as well as
“more information” forms with beautiful typography. The form were headed
“The David Lynch Educational Foundation For Consciousness-Raising
Education And World Peace”. (The “And World Peace” seems like it should
be a joke.) The dean of the college introduced the event by droning on
about how great Emerson College was. I tuned out but the people I went
with told me he gave the standard distancing-himself-from-the-event
speech, something about how they provided a range of voices to encourage
the students (profound voice:) “to quest, and to question”.

Then the president of the David Lynch Foundation came up and introduced
David Lynch, who apparently didn’t have a talk prepared and just took
some questions from the audience. I suspect some of the questions were
plants, because they sounded so suspiciously knowledgeable about
meditation, but maybe all the local meditators were attracted to the
event.

In photographs, Lynch looks like an old British dude who would have a
deep and thoughtful voice. Instead, his voice is high and squeaky and
sort of gimmicky-sounding, which also made it hard to take him
seriously. He finished up and the Foundation president came back to
introduce Dr. John Haeglin, who he presented as one of the leading
physicists of our day. And where does this great mind work? The
Maharishi University of Management, although the announcer cleverly
pronounced this so it sounded like “Murshy University”, which is more
plausible as an actual school. The Maharishi University of Management
(MUM), however, is a phony organization set up the Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi, who claims that he can fly. (The Maharishi, you may recall, also
seduced The Beatles. Their later disappointment was the source of the
song “Sexy Sadie”, which was originally titled “Maharishi”.)

Haeglin is the Maharishi’s main man in the US, running for president on
the Maharishi’s political party (the Natural Law Party), which almost
received federal funds from Perot’s Reform Party, although it narrowly
lost to Pat Buchanan. (I had my Sidekick with me, so I looked all this
up on the Web while I was listening.) Haeglin had a tricky job ahead of
him. He had to explain to the audience that practicing the Maharishi’s
Transcendental Meditation (TM) would send out a magical field that would
make everybody nearby happy and peaceful. But he also had to do so in
such a way that this audience of college kids, didn’t just break out
laughing. The answer: science.

Haeglin gave some reasonably-accurate descriptions of recent innovations
in Physics, noting that reductionism had caused us to realize that the
superficial diversity asked an underlying uniformity of, he claimed,
vibrating strings (string theory) that connect all of us together. Now
Haeglin thinks that TM will cause happy feelings to be transmitted
through the strings into nearby people. But even this seems too absurd,
so he changes tacks and tries to explain it in a common sense way. ‘If
everybody is fearful and scared,’ he says, ‘you can sort of feel it in
the air and you start to be scared. But if everyone is happy, then it’s
just the opposite. TM works in the same way — it puts happiness in the
air.’ He never directly connected this to his comments about string
theory and I didn’t really see it until I reflected on it later.

Haeglin has done several “scientific” tests, claiming that a group of
meditators can lower the crime rate, although when actual scientists
checked some of his numbers, they found he had fabricated the crime rate
statistics. And David Lynch explained that the goal of his foundation is
to raise \$7 billion so they can provide Transcendental Meditation in
every school. (The David Lynch Foundation’s website claims that TM can
cure classroom stress, clinical depression, learning disorders, high
blood pressure, and academic underachievement — oh, right, and cause
world peace.

Then he introduced a Dr. Fred Travis, also from MUM, who proceeded to do
an EEG of some kid’s brain right on stage. He showed some diagrams of
the brain, insisting it had a “CEO” which told the rest of it what to
do. Normally, he said, the brain’s pieces all scurry about doing
whatever they feel like. But Transcendental Meditation strengthens your
CEO so he can get all the pieces of the brain working together, doing
whatever the CEO wants them to do. He demonstrated this by showing the
boy’s brainwaves normally: all over the place, doing different things.
Then he asked the boy to meditate and zoomed in on two brain waves,
which started moving in tandem. What this has to do with anything
remains a mystery to me.

Then Lynch came out and took some more questions. Nobody called him on
this nonsense (I was tempted to, but didn’t). But *you* can — Lynch is
going on [a 20 city tour of universities to spread this
nonsense](http://davidlynchtour.org/). The entire event was taped so it
could be [webcast from his
website](http://www.davidlynchfoundation.com/tour/index.html).


The New McCarthy: Bill O’Reilly
===============================

October 12, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newmccarthy)

* * * * *

![Bill O'Reilly](image1_newmccarthy)![Joe McCarthy](image2_newmccarthy)

I was reading [an old transcript of a piece about Joe
McCarthy](http://chron.edgecity.net/story/2004/3/15/9333/53123)’s
anti-communist witchunt hearings and I was surprised to find that some
of his comments sounded awfully familiar. I did a little googling, and I
think I figured out why:

MCCARTHY: A few days ago I read that President Eisenhower expressed the
hope that by election time in 1954 the subject of Communism would be a
dead and forgotten issue. The raw, harsh unpleasant fact is that
Communism is an issue and will be an issue in 1954.

TONY SNOW (sitting in for O’Reilly): This morning, the president pounced
on a quote in Sunday’s New York Times Magazine where Senator Kerry
called terrorists a nuisance. ([October 10,
2004](http://mediamatters.org/items/200410130005))

MCCARTHY: You know the [American] Civil Liberties Union has been listed
as “a front for, and doing the work of,” the Communist Party?

OREILLY: [T]here is no question the ACLU and the judges who side with
them are terror allies. ([July 25,
2005](http://mediamatters.org/items/200507260002))

MCCARTHY: Now, you wrote a book in 1932. I’m going to ask you again: at
the time you wrote this book, did you feel that professors should be
given the right to teach sophomores that marriage — and I quote —
“should be cast out of our civilization as antiquated and stupid
religious phenomena?” Was that your feeling at that time?

O’REILLY: You can understand how people like me and maybe a lot of
people watching think you are a loony lefty when your book, *Fanatics &
Fools* […] is endorsed by the following: Molly Ivins; Bill Maher, Bill
Moyers; and Larry David. Why don’t you get Che Guevara on that, oh, he’s
dead. How about Fidel Castro? Come on, they are the far left fringe.
That’s who you’re hanging with … ([April 20,
2004](http://mediamatters.org/items/200404210002))

MCCARTHY: If a stupid, arrogant or witless man in a position of power
appears before our Committee and is found aiding the Communist Party, he
will be exposed. The fact that he might be a General places him in no
special class as far as I am concerned.

OREILLY: The only thing we can do is hold people who raise and give
money to the ACLU accountable. In the weeks to come, The Factor will
tell you who these people and organizations are, so you can decide
whether or not you want to do business with them. ([August 5,
2005](http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,164837,00.html))

MCCARTHY: When the shouting and the tumult dies, the American people and
the President will realize that this unprecedented mud slinging against
the Committee by the extreme left wing elements of press and radio was
caused solely because another Fifth Amendment Communist was finally dug
out of the dark recesses and exposed to the public view.

O’REILLY: Enter Hillary Clinton, who wants to sit in the White House. In
her Newsweek column this week, liberal Anna Quindlen gushes over Mrs.
Clinton, describing her as a moderate. … That’s what I mean about the
left-wing media. To them, social issues like unfettered abortion,
pro-gay instruction in public schools … [are] tak[en] for granted. ([May
10, 2005](http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,156041,00.html))

[image1_newmccarthy]: image1_newmccarthy.jpg
[image2_newmccarthy]: image2_newmccarthy.jpg

Founders Unite for Startup School
=================================

October 16, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/startupschool)

* * * * *

[The following article was originally intended for Wired News, but was
rejected for not being about any of its advertisers.]

Experts agree that it smells like a new startup age is beginning to
boom. This time, however, it’s being led by geeks themselves instead of
business guys. At the center of this democratizing force is the new
funding firm Y Combinator, led by Internet entrepreneur and essayist
Paul Graham.

Y Combinator burst onto the scene by offering small grants to promising
graduates (average age: 23) to pursue their ambitions in startup form
over the summer. And this past weekend, the people behind Y Combinator,
in association with the Harvard Computer Society, took their show to the
masses, inviting 500 of the most promising startup founders to Harvard
University for an intense one-day lecture series on all aspects of
starting a company.

The weekend was kicked off with a smaller reception at Y Combinator’s
offices the night before. The room pulsed with networking between the
various would-be founders, as well as some interesting meeting with some
of the guests of honor.

“Last night was the first time I met my lawyer,” said Steve Huffman,
Lord Ruler and Supreme Leader[\*](#err1) of Reddit, one of the companies
Y Combinator has funded. “The first thing I said was ‘Am I getting
charged for this?’ ‘No,’ she told me. ‘There are rules preventing us
from charging for parties.’”

Meanwhile, clusters of people formed around the night’s VIPs, including
blogger Joel Spolsky, scientist Stephen Wolfram, and, of course, the
Reddit developers themselves, who found themselves deluged by excited
fans.

The startup school itself was a similarly star-studded event, with Apple
Computer co-founder Steve Wozniak telling the story of how his company
got started. Michael Mandel, chief economist for *BusinessWeek* touted
the virtues of America’s entrepreneurial culture to the assembled crowd.
“People starting companies and risking failure are what makes America so
great. The people in this room are doing God’s work,” he said to
applause.

Senior officials from Google and Yahoo both espoused the virtues of
their respective companies. Lawyers from top-tier law firms provided
advice on protecting a company’s intellectual property and navigating
some of the complex legal waters of the modern business world. Founders
Langley Steinert, Marc Hedlund, and Olin Shivers tried to share some of
their assembled experience.

Because space was limited, people who wanted to attend simply needed to
fill out a simple questionnaire about their background, but the event
was entirely free of charge. It might seem unusual for a company
interested in helping hackers start companies to try to give some of
that value away but Paul Graham had an explanation. “There’s a concept
in venture capital known as ‘deal flow’,” he said in an interview. “The
deal flow is all the interesting startups to fund flowing by. And
venture capitalists just try to grab the best ones for themselves. Well,
we think the real solution to this is to increase the total deal flow
for everyone.”

Paul Graham himself gave a very well-received talk on how to come up
with ideas for startups. The thing that trips people up, he suggested,
was mistakenly thinking that a good startup idea needed to be a
million-dollar idea. Instead, he proposed prospective founders simply
look around for things that are broken with the world and try to fix
them.

Video of the talks will be available on the startup school website
shortly.

*Jessica Livingston contributed to this report. Sigh and Wrinkle
contributed additional style tips from California.*

\* An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Steve
Huffman as CEO of Reddit. Aaron Swartz: The Weblog regrets the error.
[Return to the article.](#errt1)


The Startup News
================

October 26, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thestartupnews)

* * * * *

New from me: [The Startup News](http://thestartupnews.com/), featuring
the latest news about Google, Yahoo, various new startups, acquisitions,
funding, and all that jazxz, in a concise easy-to-read format.

*Plus:* [MP3s, slides, and podcasts from the Y Combinator Startup
School](http://startupschool.infogami.com/Presentations).


Trials of Testing
=================

October 28, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/personalitytests)

* * * * *

*Since many readers complained about [the previous
piece](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/humanmysteries) we have pulled it
and provided this replacement. The things we do for you people!*

It takes little courage to denounce men [who
believe](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/humanmysteries) they can harness
the power of their minds to fly and use a space of universal
consciousness to create world peace. And, in the long run, it is of
little consequence. No one can recall the obscure psuedoscientific
claims of yesteryear.

But take the idea that underneath the skull lie a series of organs for
human traits like acquisitiveness and amorousness which bulge and change
the shape of the head with dominance. The idea seems equally
preposterous but it held real sway in its era — the Massachusetts
Medical Association and the president of Harvard threw their weight
behind it (Paul, 7) and phrenology continues to be remembered today.

Such absurd ideas are not remnants of a bygone past — just replace
“organs” with “genes” and you’ll have the new “science” of evolutionary
psychology (formerly sociobiology), an absurdity which Harvard
University’s own president has thrown the institution’s weight behind.
And yet one rarely sees “pro-science skeptics” challenging its claims.
Indeed, scientific magazines write them up with only minor questioning,
saving their ire for those who dare criticize the ideas.

But at least such fields have critics (and I count myself among them).
There are related claims, however, that exercise much more power over
our lives and (perhaps as a result) are far less challenged. One of
their creators explained that they would “promote personal development”,
“manage conflict”, and “increase human understanding worldwide.” (Paul,
121) But instead of Vedic science, she was talking about here creation:
the Myers-Briggs personality test.

I have written before about the failures of experiments to provide
evidence in favor of our concepts of
[personality](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001595) or
[intelligence](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001606) and how despite
this many continue to believe in them. One can discuss how even studies
by proponents find that IQ lacks validity and that 47% of people have a
different Myers-Briggs personality type on a second administration of a
test. But this somehow seems not to convince. So let us try another
tack: let us look at how these tests are made.

The history of the IQ test — along with a number of other supposed ways
of measuring “intelligence” — is detailed in Stephen Jay Gould’s classic
*The Mismeasure of Man*. It was originally created by Alfred Binet to
find children in French schools who might need special tutoring. Binet
thought that by locating and helping these students, one could make sure
that everyone learned all the material. Binet composed the test by
throwing together whatever questions came to mind: things about shapes
and numbers and words. He just wanted to see if some kids were having
trouble, he made no attempt to make sure the result was a balanced
measure of “intelligence”.

Lewis Terman, a professor at Stanford University, imported the Binet
test to America, added some more random things and mixed it all up a
little, and called the result the Stanford-Binet intelligence test (a
name which is still used today).^[1](#fn:n)^ One of the test’s first
applications was American Psychological Association president Robert
Yerkes’s attempt to classify the people recruited for the Army. Among
the questions:

> Crisco is a: patent medicine, disinfectant, toothpaste, food product\
>  The number of a Kaffir’s legs is: 2, 4, 6, 8\
>  Christy Mathewson is famous as a: writer, artist, baseball player,
> comedian

Recent immigrants, whose command of English might be understandably
weak, were allowed to take a pictorial version: drawing “a rivet in a
pocket knife, a filament in a light bulb, a horn on a phonograph, a net
on a tennis court, and a ball in a bowler’s hand (marked wrong, Yerkes
explained, if an examinee drew the ball in the alley, for you can tell
from the bowler’s posture that he has not yet released the ball).”
(Gould, 230)

Terman, meanwhile, conducted a longitudinal study of the people his IQ
test marked as “gifted”. Joel Shurkin, based on exclusive access to the
records, documented the full story in his book *Terman’s Kids*. Among
the study’s participants was a man named Jess Oppenheimer. “Gave the
impression of being very pushy and forward although he did not show
these characteristics during the interview,” wrote one of Terman’s
assistants. “I could detect no signs of a sense of a humor.” (Shurkin,
54) Oppenheimer went on to create and write the shows *I Love Lucy* and
*Get Smart*.

The story of personality tests is little better. In her book *The Cult
of Personality* (recently republished as *The Cult of Personality
Testing*), Annie Murphy Paul (a former senior editor for mass bi-monthly
*Psychology Today*) describes the history of all the major personality
tests. Take the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI),
which was created in a similar way to the IQ test.

The test was created by psychologist Starke Hathaway and
neuropsychiatrist J. Charnley McKinley by simply coming up with a bunch
of true-or-false statements that they thought might indicate whether the
respondent had a mental illness. Among them:

> I have never had any black, tarry-looking bowel movements.\
>  I have had no difficulty starting or holding my urine.\
>  I have never indulged in any unusual sexual practices.\
>  There is something wrong with my sex organs.\
>  I believe there is a Devil and a Hell in the afterlife.\
>  Everything is turning out as the Bible said it would.\
>  I think I would like to belong to a motorcycle club.\
>  Often I feel as if there were a tight band around my head.\
>  I loved my father.\
>  I like to flirt.\
>  I believe my sins are unpardonable.\
>  I have a good appetite.\
>  I think Lincoln was greater than Washington.\
>  Women should not be allowed to drink in cocktail bars.\
>  A large number of people are guilty of bad sexual conduct.\
>  If the money were right, I would like to work for a circus or
> carnival. (Paul, 53)

The resulting test was administered to the patients at the University of
Minnesota mental hospital as well as the (presumably sane) staff there
(all white, Protestant, Minnesotans who came to be known as the
“Minnesota Normals”). Statistical analysis was then done to determine
which questions more accurately predicted whether the user had a mental
illness and more specifically, what kind.^[2](#fn:m)^

This was quickly generalized: people who scored above-average on the
scales for Hysteria or Depression (but not high enough to actually have
a mental illness) could be said to have hysterical or depressive
*personalities*, even though there was absolutely no evidence to support
this leap (not that it was on particularly sturdy ground to begin with).

The resulting test was used to analyze people in business, the army,
court, high school, and at the doctor’s. It was “used to screen job
applicants, offer vocational advice, settle custody disputes, and
determine legal status.” (Paul, 58f) And while the test engendered some
backlash, it continues to be used frequently today, often as the a
requirement for getting or keeping a job. Paul notes “the MMPI (in an
updated version) is employed by 86% of clinical psychologists and
administered, by one estimate, to 15 million Americans each year.” (63)
For example, it is used by 60% of police departments to evaluate
prospective officers. Meanwhile, studies show that such tests can reject
as high as 60% of healthy applicants.

This is but one example — and one chapter in Paul’s book — but all the
others all have similar stories. An absurd test, concocted through
absurd means, completely untested, ends up becoming a powerful societal
force. All the more reason for us to speak out about them.

* * * * *

1.  Incidentally, although Terman did not put his name on the test, his
    family continues to have a presence at Stanford. His son Frederick
    Emmons Terman was a professor of engineering (and later provost);
    the Terman Engineering Center, which was across the street from my
    dorm, is named in his honor. And down the hall from me in my dorm
    lived his daughter, who, in full disclosure, I ate meals with a
    couple times. [↩](#fnref:n)

2.  Not that this methodology is necessarily flawed, although it leads
    to some interesting conclusions. Paul writes that in one experiment,
    the question “that yielded some of the most useful information”
    about whether someone had a fascist personality was: “Obedience and
    respect for authority are the most important virtues children should
    learn.” (Paul, 147) [↩](#fnref:m)




Birthday Thoughts
=================

November 8, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/birthdaythoughts)

* * * * *

It’s my birthday today, although it doesn’t feel like it. But better
than [any material presents I would
want](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wishlist) is making [my on-screen
debut](http://www.projectaardvark.com/movie/). I sound so profound with
a soundtrack!


Understanding Economic Jargon
=============================

November 25, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/understandingeconomics)

* * * * *

These days it seems like economists are everywhere — the newspaper, the
television, the school system, the bookstore — speaking in their own
special brand of jargon, a language I call “economese”. Understanding
what they mean is often difficult without formal training, so I’ve put
together this helpful guide on the subject.

  Economese                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Standard English
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  What Americans need most is a ~~good economic education~~. All too often in politics and on the news you hear people making absurd suggestions, like ~~setting price caps~~ or ~~enforcing a minimum wage~~. If Americans knew even basic ~~principles of economics~~, they would quickly reject such absurd notions.                                                                                                                                   What Americans need most is a strong religious upbringing. All too often in politics and on the news you hear people making absurd suggestions, like letting gay people marry or legalizing abortion. If Americans knew even basic teachings of religion, they would quickly reject such absurd notions.
  What Americans fail to understand is that the necessities of life — the food they eat, the cars they drive, the clothes they wear — are provided not by ~~government~~ but by ~~the market~~. ~~The free functioning of the market~~ ensures that everyone receives what they deserve and all the necessities of life are provided for. ~~Markets are maximally efficient~~, so having government ~~interfere with them~~ can only hurt us, not help.   What Americans fail to understand is that the necessities of life — the food they eat, the cars they drive, the clothes they wear — are provided not by people but by God. Following God’s teachings ensures that everyone receives what they deserve and all the necessities of life are provided for. God is omnipotent and omniscient, so having government disobey His teachings can only hurt us, not help.
  Indeed, ~~markets~~ are such wondrous things that we must bring them into all spheres of life. Our great government institutions must be ~~privatized~~ and made subject to ~~market~~ discipline. ~~Market forces~~ shall ensure that the result will be even more ~~efficient~~.                                                                                                                                                                      Indeed, God is such a wondrous thing that we must bring Him into all spheres of life. Our great government institutions must be faith-based and made subject to His discipline. God’s will shall ensure that the result will be even more effective.
  Many people refuse to believe in ~~the market~~ and try to shelter themselves from ~~market forces~~. College professors ~~receive guaranteed employment for life~~, public television stations ~~receive government subsidies~~, and politicians ~~receive donations from people and corporations~~. Not surprisingly, all three of these groups are hotbeds of anti-~~market~~ sentiment.                                                             Many people refuse to believe in God and try to shelter themselves from His will. College professors work with materialist scientists, public television stations work with atheist organizations, and politicians hobnob with the liberal elite. Not surprisingly, all three of these groups are hotbeds of anti-religious sentiment.
  The average person cannot afford such a luxury. They know they are born ~~poor~~ and must work hard and follow the instructions of their ~~boss~~ so that one day they may become ~~rich~~. It is a long and difficult struggle and not all succeed, but those who do bask in the ~~lifelong~~ glory of ~~wealth~~.                                                                                                                                     The average person cannot afford such a luxury. They know they are born into sin and must work hard and follow the instructions of their priest so that one day they may become righteous. It is a long and difficult struggle and not all succeed, but those who do bask in the eternal glory of Heaven.
  It is only by obeying the ~~principles of economics~~ — ~~free markets, free trade, free capital flows~~ — that we will ever ~~cure poverty~~. But the American people will only consent to such a plan when we teach them of its truth. Only through mandatory ~~economic~~ instruction in our public schools can we hope to rescue our country from its ~~ignorance~~.                                                                                It is only by obeying the teachings of the Bible — honor God, honor parents, honor religious leaders — that we will ever stop sinning. But the American people will only consent to such a plan when we teach them of its truth. Only through mandatory religious instruction in our public schools can we hope to rescue our country from its Godlessness.

Inspiration: [Let There Be Markets: The evangelical roots of
economics](http://www.mindfully.org/Industry/2005/Evangelical-Economics1may05.htm),
[A Person Paper on Purity in
Language](http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~evans/cs655/readings/purity.html)


Rewriting Reddit
================

December 6, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rewritingreddit)

* * * * *

**Translations:**
[Srpsko-Hrvatski](http://science.webhostinggeeks.com/ponovno-pisanje-reddit)

*2012 note: This article was first published in 2005. After it was
published, Django launched a RemovingTheMagic project to address some of
my criticisms (though personally I still find it unusable),
[web.py](http://webpy.org/) inspired FriendFeed’s
[tornado.web](http://www.tornadoweb.org/) and Google’s
[gae.webapp](https://developers.google.com/appengine/docs/python/gettingstarted/usingwebapp)
and others (though I still prefer web.py), and this article led to a
permanent surge in Reddit traffic that still hasn’t really stopped
growing.*

[![reddit mascot](image1_rewritingreddit)](http://reddit.com/)

Over at [reddit.com](http://reddit.com/), we rewrote the site from Lisp
to Python in the past week. It was pretty much done in one weekend.
(Disclosure: We used my [web.py](http://webpy.org/) library.) The others
knew Lisp (they wrote their whole site in it) and they knew Python (they
rewrote their whole site in it) and yet they decided liked Python better
for this project. The Python version had less code that ran faster and
was far easier to read and maintain.

The idea that there is something better than Lisp is apparently
inconceivable to some, judging from comments [on the reddit
blog](http://reddit.com/blog/2005/12/night-of-living-python.html). The
Lispers instead quickly set about trying to find the *real* reason
behind the switch.

One assumed it must have been divine intervention, since “there seems to
be no other reason for switching to an inferior language.” Another
figured something else must be going on: “Could this be…a lie? To throw
off competition? It’s not as though Paul Graham hasn’t hinted at this
tactic in his essays…” Another chimed in: “I decided it was a prank.”
Another suggested the authors simply wanted more “cut corners, hacks,
and faked artisanship.”

These were, of course, extreme cases. Others assumed there must have
been outside pressure. “Either libraries or hiring new programmers I
guess.” Another concluded: “some vc suit wants a
maintainable-by-joe-programmer product. I hope he pays you millions.”

The Lisp newsgroup, `comp.lang.lisp`, was upset about the switch that
they’re currently [planning to *write a competitor* to reddit in
Lisp](http://groups.google.com/group/comp.lang.lisp/browse_frm/thread/f560fdfb211aa8cb/c0159fbbc6496def),
to show how right they are or something.

The more sane argued along the lines of saying Lisp’s value lies in
being able to create [new linguistic
constructs](http://reddit.com/blog/2005/12/night-of-living-python.html#113382802678872391)
and that for something like a simple web app, this isn’t necessary,
since the constructs have been already built. But even this isn’t true.
[web.py](http://webpy.org/) was built pretty much from scratch and uses
all sorts of “new linguistic constructs” and — even better — these
constructs have syntax that goes along with them and makes them
reasonably readable. Sure, Python isn’t Perl 6, so you can’t add
arbitrary syntax, but you can often find a clever way to get the job
done.

* * * * *

Python, on the other hand, has problems of its own. The biggest is that
it has dozens of web application frameworks, but none of them are any
good. Pythonists are well aware of the first part but apparently not of
the second, since when I tell them that I’m using my own library, the
universal response is “I don’t think Python needs another web
application framework”. Yes, Python needs fewer web application
frameworks. But it also needs one that doesn’t suck.

The framework that seems most promising is
[Django](http://djangoproject.com/) and indeed we initially attempted to
rewrite Reddit in it. As the most experienced Python programmer, I tried
my best to help the others out.

Django seemed great from the outside: a nice-looking website,
intelligent and talented developers, and a seeming surplus of nice
features. The developers and community are extremely helpful and
responsive to patches and suggestions. And all the right goals are
espoused in their philosophy documents and FAQs. Unfortunately, however,
they seem completely incapable of living up to them.

While Django claims that it’s “loosely coupled”, using it pretty much
requires fitting your code into Django’s worldview. Django insists on
executing your code itself, either through its command-line utility or a
specialized server handler called with the appropriate environment
variables and Python path. When you start a project, by default Django
creates folders nested four levels deep for your code and while you can
move around some files, I had trouble figuring out which ones and how.

Django’s philosophy says “Explicit is better than implicit”, but Django
has all sorts of magic. Database models you create in one file magically
appear someplace else deep inside the Django module with a different
name. When your model function is called, new things have been added to
its variable-space and old ones removed. (I’m told they’re currently
working on fixing both of these, though.)

Another Django goal is “less code”, at least for you. But Django is
simply full of code. Inside the django module are 10 different folders
and inside each of those are a few more. By the time you actually build
a site in the Django tutorial, you’ve imported `django.core.meta`,
`django.models.polls`, `django.conf.urls.defaults.*`,
`django.utils.httpwrappers.HttpResponse`, and
`django.core.extensions.render_to_response`. It’s not clear how anyone
is supposed to remember all that, especially since there appear to be no
guiding principles for what goes where or how it’s named. Three of these
are inserted automatically by the start scripts, but you still need to
memorize such names for every other function you want to use.

But Django’s most important problem is that its developers seem
incapable of designing a decent API. They’re clearly capable Python
programmers — their code uses all sorts of bizarre tricks. And they’re
clearly able to write code that works — they have all sorts of
interesting features. But they can’t seem to shape this code into
something that other people can use.

Their APIs are ugly and regularly missing key features: the database API
figures out queries by counting underscores but has no special syntax
for JOINs, the template system requires four curly braces around every
variable and can’t do any sort of computation, the form API requires 15
lines to process a form and can’t automatically generate the template.

I tried my best to fix things — and the Django community was extremely
supportive — but the task simply dwarfed me. I just couldn’t do it
mentally, let alone with the time constraints of having to actually
build my own application for my own startup.

* * * * *

And so, Lisp and Django found wanting, we’re left with
[web.py](http://webpy.org/). I’d like to say that web.py learned from
these mistakes and was designed to avoid them, but the truth is that
web.py was written long before all this and managed to avoid them
anyway.

The way I wrote web.py was simple: I imagined how things should work and
then I made that happen. Sometimes making things just work takes a lot
of code. Sometimes it only takes a little. But either way, that fact is
hidden from the user — they just get the ideal API.

So how should things work? The first principle is that code should be
clear and simple. If you want to output some text, you call web.output.
If you want to get form input, you call web.input. There’s nothing
particularly hard to remember.

The second principle is that web.py should fit your code, not the other
way around. Every function in web.py is completely independent, you can
use whichever ones you want. You can put your files wherever you like,
and web.py will happily follow along. If you want a piece of code to be
run as a web app, you call web.run, you don’t put your code in the
magical place so that web.py can run you.

The third principle is that web.py should, by default, do the right
thing by the Web. This means distinguishing between GET and POST
properly. It means simple, canonical URLs which synonyms redirect to. It
means readable HTML with the proper HTTP headers.

And that, as far as I’m concerned, are pretty much all the principles
you need. They seem pretty simple and obvious to me and I’m even willing
to fudge on some of them, but no other Python web app framework seems to
even come close. (If you know of one, tell me and I’ll happily recant. I
don’t want to be in this business.) Until then, it looks like I’m forced
to do that horrible thing I’d rather not do: release one more Python web
application framework into the world.

[image1_rewritingreddit]: image1_rewritingreddit.jpg

A Brief History of Ajax
=======================

December 22, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ajaxhistory)

* * * * *

New technology quickly becomes so pervasive that it’s sometimes hard to
remember what things were like before it. The latest example of this in
miniature is the technique known as Ajax, which has become so widespread
that it’s often thought that the technique has been around practically
forever.

In some ways it has. During the first big stretch of browser innovation,
Netscape added a feature known as LiveScript, which allowed people to
put small scripts in web pages so that they could continue to do things
after you’d downloaded them. One early example was the Netscape form
system, which would tell you if you’d entered an invalid value for a
field as soon as you entered it, instead of after you tried to submit
the form to the server.

LiveScript became JavaScript and grew more powerful, leading to a
technique known as Dynamic HTML, which was typically used to make things
fly around the screen and change around in response to user input. Doing
anything serious with Dynamic HTML was painful, however, because all the
major browsers implemented its pieces slightly differently.

Shortly before web development died out, in early versions of Mozilla,
Netscape showed a new kind of technique. I don’t think it ever had a
name, but we could call it Dynamic XML. The most vivid example I
remember seeing was a mockup of an Amazon.com search result. The webpage
looked just like a typical Amazon.com search result page, but instead of
being written in HTML it was a piece of XML data which was then rendered
for the user by a piece of JavaScript. The cool part was that this meant
the rendering could be changed on the fly — there were a bunch of
buttons that would allow you to sort the books in different ways and
have them display using different schemes.

Shortly thereafter the bubble burst and web development crashed. Not,
however, before Microsoft added a little-known function call named
XMLHttpRequest to IE5. Mozilla quickly followed suit and, while nobody I
know used it, the function stayed there, just waiting to be taken
advantage of.

XMLHttpRequest allowed the JavaScript inside web pages to do something
they could never really do before: get more data.^[1](#fn:1)^ Before,
all the data either had to be sent with the web page. If you wanted more
data or new data, you had to grab another web page. The JavaScript
inside web pages couldn’t talk to the outside world. XMLHttpRequest
changed that, allowing web pages to get more data from the server
whenever they pleased.

Google was apparently the first to realize what a sea change this was.
With Gmail and Google Maps, they built applications that took advantage
of this to provide a user interface that was much more like a web
application. (The startup Oddpost, bought by Yahoo, actually predated
this but their software was for-pay and so they didn’t receive as much
attention.)

With Gmail, for example, the application is continually asking the
server if there’s new email. If there is, then it live updates the page,
it doesn’t make you download a new one. And Google Maps lets you drag a
map around and, as you do so, automatically downloads the parts of it
you want to look at inline, without making you wait for a whole new page
to download.

Jesse James Garrett of Adaptive Path described this new tactic as Ajax
(Asynchronous Javascript And XML) [in an
essay](http://www.adaptivepath.com/publications/essays/archives/000385.php)
and the term immediately took off. Everyone began using the technique in
their own software and JavaScript toolkits sprung up to make doing so
even easier.

And the rest is future history.

Both systems were relatively ill-supported by browsers in my experience.
They were, after all, hacks. So while they both seemed extremely cool
(KnowNow, in particular, had an awesome demo that allowed for a WYSIWYG
SubEthaEdit-style live collaboration session in a browser), they never
really took off.

Now apparently there is another technique, which I was unaware of, that
[involved changing the URL of an
iframe](http://developer.apple.com/internet/webcontent/iframe.html) to
load new JavaScript. I’m not sure why this technique didn’t quite take
off. While Google Maps apparently used it (and Oddpost probably did as
well), I don’t know of any other major users.

* * * * *

1.  As my commenters point out — and as I well knew, but momentarily
    forgotten — this isn’t really true. Before XMLHttpRequest, people
    used a trick of not closing the connection to the server. The server
    would keep adding more and more to the page, never saying it had
    finished downloading. Ka-Ping Yee used this technique to make a
    [real-time chat system](http://zesty.ca/chat/) based on an animated
    GIF. And the ill-fated startup KnowNow used a similar technique with
    JavaScript to allow for live-updating pages. [↩](#fnref:1)




HOWTO: Be more productive
=========================

December 28, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity)

* * * * *

**Translations:**
[日本語](http://www.emptypage.jp/translations/aaron/productivity.html) |
[Русский](http://www.developers.org.ua/archives/a4/2007/02/28/how-to-be-productive1/)
| [Беларуская](http://webhostinggeeks.com/science/productivity-be)

“With all the time you spend watching TV,” he tells me, “you could have
written a novel by now.” It’s hard to disagree with the sentiment —
writing a novel is undoubtedly a better use of time than watching TV —
but what about the hidden assumption? Such comments imply that time is
“fungible” — that time spent watching TV can just as easily be spent
writing a novel. And sadly, that’s just not the case.

Time has various levels of quality. If I’m walking to the subway station
and I’ve forgotten my notebook, then it’s pretty hard for me to write
more than a couple paragraphs. And it’s tough to focus when you keep
getting interrupted. There’s also a mental component: sometimes I feel
happy and motivated and ready to work on something, but other times I
feel so sad and tired I can only watch TV.

If you want to be more productive then, you have to recognize this fact
and deal with it. First, you have to make the best of each kind of time.
And second, you have to try to make your time higher-quality.

Spend time efficiently
----------------------

### Choose good problems

Life is short (or so I’m told) so why waste it doing something dumb?
It’s easy to start working on something because it’s convenient, but you
should always be questioning yourself about it. Is there something more
important you can work on? Why don’t you do that instead? Such questions
are hard to face up to (eventually, if you follow this rule, you’ll have
to ask yourself why you’re not working on the most important problem in
the world) but each little step makes you more productive.

This isn’t to say that all your time should be spent on the most
important problem in the world. Mine certainly isn’t (after all, I’m
writing this essay). But it’s definitely the standard against which I
measure my life.

### Have a bunch of them

Another common myth is that you’ll get more done if you pick one problem
and focus on it exclusively. I find this is hardly ever true. Just this
moment for example, I’m trying to fix my posture, exercise some muscles,
drink some fluids, clean off my desk, IM with my brother, and write this
essay. Over the course the day, I’ve worked on this essay, read a book,
had some food, answered some email, chatted with friends, done some
shopping, worked on a couple other essays, backed up my hard drive, and
organized my book list. In the past week I’ve worked on several
different software projects, read several different books, studied a
couple different programming languages, moved some of my stuff, and so
on.

Having a lot of different projects gives you work for different
qualities of time. Plus, you’ll have other things to work on if you get
stuck or bored (and that can give your mind time to unstick yourself).

It also makes you more creative. Creativity comes from applying things
you learn in other fields to the field you work in. If you have a bunch
of different projects going in different fields, then you have many more
ideas you can apply.

### Make a list

Coming up with a bunch of different things to work on shouldn’t be hard
— most people have tons of stuff they want to get done. But if you try
to keep it all in your head it quickly gets overwhelming. The psychic
pressure of having to remember all of it can make you crazy. The
solution is again simple: write it down.

Once you have a list of all the things you want to do, you can organize
it by kind. For example, my list is programming, writing, thinking,
errands, reading, listening, and watching (in that order).

Most major projects involve a bunch of these different tasks. Writing
this, for example, involves reading about other procrastination systems,
thinking up new sections of the article, cleaning up sentences, emailing
people with questions, and so on, all in addition to the actual work of
writing the text. Each task can go under the appropriate section, so
that you can do it when you have the right kind of time.

#### Integrate the list with your life

Once you have this list, the problem becomes remembering to look at it.
And the best way to remember to look at it is to make looking at it what
you would do anyway. For example, I keep a stack of books on my desk,
with the ones I’m currently reading on top. When I need a book to read,
I just grab the top one off the stack.

I do the same thing with TV/movies. Whenever I hear about a movie I
should watch, I put it in a special folder on my computer. Now whenever
I feel like watching TV, I just open up that folder.

I’ve also thought about some more intrusive ways of doing this. For
example, a web page that pops up with a list of articles in my “to read”
folder whenever I try to check some weblogs. Or maybe even a window that
pops up with work suggestions occasionally for me to see when I’m
goofing off.

Make your time higher quality
-----------------------------

Making the best use of the time you have can only get you so far. The
much more important problem is making more higher quality time for
yourself. Most people’s time is eaten up by things like school and work.
Obviously if you attend one of these, you should stop. But what else can
you do?

### Ease physical constraints

#### Carry pen and paper

Pretty much everyone interesting I know has some sort of pocket notebook
they carry at all times. Pen and paper is immediately useful in all
kinds of circumstances — if you need to write something down for
somebody, take notes on something, scratch down an idea, and so on. I’ve
even written whole articles in the subway.^[1](#fn:sub)^

(I used to do this, but now I just carry my computerphone everywhere. It
doesn’t let me give people information physically, but it makes up for
it by giving me something to read all the time (email) and pushing my
notes straight into my email inbox, where I’m forced to deal with them
right away.)

#### Avoid being interrupted

For tasks that require serious focus, you should avoid getting
interrupted. One simple way is to go somewhere interrupters can’t find
you. Another is to set up an agreement with the people around you:
“don’t bother me when the door is closed” or “IM me if I have headphones
on” (and then you can ignore the IMs until you’re free).

You don’t want to overdo it. Sometimes if you’re really wasting time you
*should* be distracted. It’s a much better use of time to help someone
else with their problem than it is to sit and read the news. That’s why
setting up specific agreements is a good idea: you *can* be interrupted
when you’re not really focusing.

### Ease mental constraints

#### Eat, sleep, exercise

Time when you’re hungry or tired or twitchy is low-quality time.
Improving it is simple: eat, sleep, and exercise. Yet I somehow manage
to screw up even this. I don’t like going to get food, so I’ll often
work right through being hungry and end up so tired out that I can’t
bring myself to go get food.^[2](#fn:t)^

It’s tempting to say to yourself, “I know I’m tired but I can’t take a
nap — I have work to do”. In fact, you’ll be much more productive if you
do take that nap, since you’ll improve the quality of the day’s
remaining time and you were going to have to sleep sometime anyway.

I don’t really exercise much so I’m probably not the best person to give
advice on that bit, but I do try to work it in where I can. While I’m
lying down reading, I do situps. And when I need to go somewhere on
foot, I run.

#### Talk to cheerful people

Easing mental constraints is much harder. One thing that helps is having
friends who are cheerful. For example, I always find myself much more
inclined to work after talking to Paul Graham or Dan Connolly — they
just radiate energy. It’s tempting to think that you need to get away
from people and shut yourself off in your room to do any real work, but
this can be so demoralizing that it’s actually less efficient.

#### Share the load

Even if your friends aren’t cheerful, just working on a hard problem
with someone else makes it *much* easier. For one thing, the mental
weight gets spread across both people. For another, having someone else
there forces you to work instead of getting distracted.

#### Procrastination and the mental force field

But all of this is sort of dodging the issue. The real productivity
problem people have is procrastination. It’s something of a dirty little
secret, but *everyone* procrastinates — severely. It’s not just you. But
that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t try to stop it.

What is procrastination? To the outside observer, it looks like you’re
just doing something “fun” (like playing a game or reading the news)
instead of doing your actual work. (This usually causes the outside
observer to think you’re lazy and bad.) But the real question is: what’s
going on inside your head?

I’ve spent a bunch of time trying to explore this and the best way I can
describe it is that your brain puts up a sort of mental force field
around a task. Ever play with two magnets? If you orient the magnets
properly and try to push them towards each other, they’ll repel
fiercely. As you move them around, you can sort of feel out the edges of
the magnetic field. And as you try to bring the magnets together, the
field will push you back or off in another direction.

The mental block seems to work in the same way. It’s not particularly
solid or visible, but you can sort of feel it around the edges. And the
more you try to go towards it the more it pushes you away. And so, not
surprisingly, you end up going in another direction.^[3](#fn:s)^

And just as you can’t get two repelling magnets to sit together just by
pushing real hard — they’ll fling back as soon as you stop pushing —
I’ve never been able to overcome this mental force field through sheer
willpower. Instead, you have to be sneaky about it — you have to rotate
a magnet.

So what causes the mental force field? There appear to be two major
factors: whether the task is hard and whether it’s assigned.

##### Hard problems

###### Break it down

The first kind of hard problem is the problem that’s too big. Say you
want to build a recipe organizing program. Nobody can really just sit
down and build a recipe organizer. That’s a goal, not a task. A task is
a specific concrete step you can take towards your goal. A good first
task might be something like “draw a mockup of the screen that displays
a recipe”. Now that’s something you can do.^[4](#fn:nc)^

And when you do that, the next steps become clearer. You have to decide
what a recipe consists of, what kind of search features are needed, how
to structure the recipe database, and so on. You build up a momentum,
each task leading to the next. And as your brain gets crunching on the
subject, it becomes easier to solve that subject’s problems.

For each of my big projects, I think of all the tasks I can do next for
them and add them to my categorized todo list (see above). And when I
stop working on something, I add its next possible tasks to the todo
list.

###### Simplify it

Another kind of hard problem is the one that’s too complicated or
audacious. Writing a book seems daunting, so start by doing an essay. If
an essay is too much, start by writing a paragraph summary. The
important thing is to have something done right away.

Once you have something, you can judge it more accurately and understand
the problem better. It’s also much easier to improve something that
already exists than to work at a blank page. If your paragraph goes
well, then maybe it can grow into an essay and then into a book, little
by little, a perfectly reasonable piece of writing all the way through..

###### Think about it

Often the key to solving a hard problem will be getting some piece of
inspiration. If you don’t know much about the field, you should
obviously start by researching it — see how other people did things, get
a sense of the terrain. Sit and try and understand the field fully. Do
some smaller problems to see if you have a handle on it.

##### Assigned problems

Assigned problems are problems you’re told to work on. Numerous
psychology experiments have found that when you try to “incentivize”
people to do something, they’re less likely to do it and do a worse job.
External incentives, like rewards and punishments, kills what
psychologists call your “intrinsic motivation” — your natural interest
in the problem. (This is one of the most thoroughly replicated findings
of social psychology — over 70 studies have found that rewards undermine
interest in the task.)^[5](#fn:kohn)^ People’s heads seem to have a deep
avoidance of being told what to do.^[6](#fn:avo)^

The weird thing is that this phenomenon isn’t just limited to other
people — it even happens when you try to tell *yourself* what to do! If
you say to yourself, “I should really work on X, that’s the most
important thing to do right now” then all of the sudden X becomes the
toughest thing in the world to make yourself work on. But as soon as Y
becomes the most important thing, the exact same X becomes much easier.

###### Create a false assignment

This presents a rather obvious solution: if you want to work on X, tell
yourself to do Y. Unfortunately, it’s sort of difficult to trick
yourself intentionally, because you know you’re doing it.^[7](#fn:feyn)^
So you’ve got to be sneaky about it.

One way is to get someone else to assign something to you. The most
famous instance of this is grad students who are required to write a
dissertation, a monumentally difficult task that they need to do to
graduate. And so, to avoid doing this, grad students end up doing all
sorts of other hard stuff.

The task has to both seem important (you have to do this to graduate!)
and big (hundreds of pages of your best work!) but not actually be so
important that putting it off is going to be a disaster.

###### Don’t assign problems to yourself

It’s very tempting to say “alright, I need to put all this aside, hunker
down and finish this essay”. Even worse is to try to bribe yourself into
doing something, like saying “alright, if I just finish this essay then
I’ll go and eat some candy”. But the absolute worst of all is to get
someone else to try to force you to do something.

All of these are very tempting — I’ve done them all myself — but they’re
completely counterproductive. In all three cases, you’ve basically
assigned yourself a task. Now your brain is going to do everything it
can to escape it.

###### Make things fun

Hard work isn’t supposed to be pleasant, we’re told. But in fact it’s
probably the most enjoyable thing I do. Not only does a tough problem
completely absorb you while you’re trying to solve it, but afterwards
you feel wonderful having accomplished something so serious.

So the secret to getting yourself to do something is not to convince
yourself you have to do it, but to convince yourself that it’s fun. And
if it isn’t, then you need to make it fun.

I first got serious about this when I had to write essays for college.
Writing essays isn’t a particularly hard task, but it sure is assigned.
Who would voluntarily write a couple pages connecting the observations
of two random books? So I started making the essays into my own little
jokes. For one, I decided to write each paragraph in its own little
style, trying my best to imitate various forms of speech. (This had the
added benefit of padding things out.)^[8](#fn:ex)^

Another way to make things more fun is to solve the meta-problem.
Instead of building a web application, try building a web application
framework with this as the example app. Not only will the task be more
enjoyable, but the result will probably be more useful.

Conclusion
----------

There are a lot of myths about productivity — that time is fungible,
that focusing is good, that bribing yourself is effective, that hard
work is unpleasant, that procrastinating is unnatural — but they all
have a common theme: a conception of real work as something that goes
against your natural inclinations.

And for most people, in most jobs, this may be the case. There’s no
reason you should be inclined to write boring essays or file pointless
memos. And if society is going to force you to do so anyway, then you
need to learn to shut out the voices in your head telling you to stop.

But if you’re trying to do something worthwhile and creative, then
shutting down your brain is entirely the wrong way to go. The real
secret to productivity is the reverse: to listen to your body. To eat
when you’re hungry, to sleep when you’re tired, to take a break when
you’re bored, to work on projects that seem fun and interesting.

It seems all too simple. It doesn’t involve any fancy acronyms or
self-determination or personal testimonials from successful businessmen.
It almost seems like common sense. But society’s conception of work has
pushed us in the opposite direction. If we want to be more productive,
all we need to do is turn around.

Further reading
---------------

If you want to learn more about the pscyhology of motivation, there is
nothing better than [Alfie Kohn](http://www.alfiekohn.org/). He’s
written [many articles on the
subject](http://www.alfiekohn.org/articles.htm) and an entire book,
[Punished by Rewards](http://www.alfiekohn.org/books/pbr.htm), which I
highly recommend.

I hope to address how to quit school in a future essay, but you should
really just go out and pick up *[The Teenage Liberation
Handbook](http://www.lowryhousepublishers.com/TeenageLiberationHandbook.htm)*.
If you’re a computer person, one way to quit your job is by applying for
funding from [Y Combinator](http://ycombinator.com/). Meanwhile, Mickey
Z’s book *[The Murdering of My
Years](http://www.softskull.com/detailedbook.php?isbn=1-887128-78-6)*
features artists and activists describing how they manage to make ends
meet while still doing what they want.

Notes
-----

* * * * *

1.  Believe it or not, I actually have written in subways. It’s easy to
    come up with excuses as to why you’re not actually working — you
    don’t have enough time before your next appointment, people are
    making noise downstairs, etc. — but I find that when the inspiration
    strikes me, I can actually write stuff down on a subway car, where
    it’s absurdly loud and I only have a couple minutes before I have to
    get out and start walking. [↩](#fnref:sub)

2.  The same problem exists for sleep. There’s nothing worse than being
    too tired to go to bed — you just feel like a zombie. [↩](#fnref:t)

3.  Now it turns out I experience this same phenomenon in another area:
    shyness. I often don’t want to call a stranger up on the phone or go
    talk to someone at a party and I have the exact same mental field
    pushing me off in some other direction. I suspect this might be
    because shyness is also a trait that results from a problematic
    childhood. (See “Assigned problems”.) Of course, this is all very
    speculative. [↩](#fnref:s)

4.  While the terminology I use here (“next concrete step”) is derived
    from David Allen’s *Getting Things Done*, a lot of the principles
    here are (perhaps even unconsciously) applied in Extreme Programming
    (XP). Extreme Programming is presented as this system for keeping
    programs organized, but I find that a lot of it is actually good
    advice for avoid procrastination.

    For example, pair programming automatically spreads the mental
    weight of the task across two people as well as giving people
    something useful to do during lower-quality time. Breaking a project
    down into concrete steps is another key part of XP, as is getting
    something that works done right away and improving on it (“Simplify
    it” *infra*). And these are just the things that aren’t
    programming-specific. [↩](#fnref:nc)

5.  For a fantastic overview of the literature, see Alfie Kohn,
    *Punished By Rewards*. This specific claim is drawn from his article
    [Challenging Behaviorist Dogma: Myths About Money and
    Motivation](http://www.alfiekohn.org/managing/cbdmamam.htm). [↩](#fnref:kohn)

6.  I originally simply assumed this was somehow biological, but Paul
    Graham pointed out it’s more likely learned. When you’re little,
    your parents try their best to manipulate you. They say do your
    homework and your mind tries to wriggle free and think about
    something else. Soon enough the wriggling becomes habit. Either way,
    it’s going to be a tough problem to fix. I’ve given up trying to
    change this; now I try to work around it. [↩](#fnref:avo)

7.  Richard Feynman tells a story about how he was trying to explore his
    own dreams, much the way I’ve tried to explore my own
    procrastination. Each night, he’d try to observe what happened to
    himself as he fell asleep:

    > I’m dreaming one night as usual, making observations, … and then I
    > realize I’ve been sleeping with the back of my head against a
    > brass rod. I put my hand behind my head and I feel that the back
    > of my head is *soft*. I think, “Aha! That’s why I’ve been able to
    > make all these observations in my dreams: the brass rod has
    > disturbed my visual cortex. All I have to do is sleep with a brass
    > rod under my head and I can make these observations any time I
    > want. So I think I’ll stop making observations on this one and go
    > into deeper sleep.”
    >
    > When I woke up later, there was no brass rod, nor was the back of
    > my head soft. Somehow … my brain had invented false reasons as to
    > why I shouldn’t [observe my dreams] any more. (*Surely You’re
    > Joking, Mr. Feynman!*, 50)

    Your brain is a lot more powerful than you are. [↩](#fnref:feyn)

8.  So, for example, instead of writing “By contrast, Riis doesn’t quote
    many people.”, I wrote: “Riis, however, whether because of a
    personal deficit in the skill-based capacity required for collecting
    aurally-transmitted person-centered contemporaneous ethnographies
    into published paper-based informative accounts or simply a lack of
    preference for the reportage of community-located informational
    correspondents, demonstrates a total failure in producing a
    comparable result.”

    The professor, apparently seriously desensitized to bad writing,
    never seemed to realize I was joking (despite going over the paper
    with me one-on-one!). [↩](#fnref:ex)




Colombia is Bleeding
====================

January 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/colombiaisbleeding)

* * * * *

*Nellie McKay is having trouble getting her new album,* Pretty Little
Head, *released, apparently due to the content of artistic differences
with the record label. The best song on the album, and one that is
particularly mentioned in this regard, is “Columbia is Bleeding”, her
vicious portrayal of college life while students are oblivious to [the
animal torture going on around them](http://www.columbiacruelty.com/).*

*However, it seems like the song might really be more appropriate for [a
different Colombia](http://www.chomsky.info/articles/200412--.htm).
Here, then, are those lyrics…*

another day begins\
 you check the news\
 ah-sass-ih-nay-she-uns\
 here come the footstep of the man who’ll end your life\
 the rifle’s is fitted in\
 and there you are\
 the shot is targeted\
 then a scream

hold your placard up / cold and coffee cup\
 after go to a bar\
 hand your flier out / must admire\
 how dedicated you are\
 i don’t wanna know if biz is boomin’\
 or the goods you make are on sale\
 i don’t wanna know ‘bout your [“saintly glow” or your “noble”
show](http://www.thirdworldtraveler.com/Haiti/NoblePhase_GHRTT.html)\
 or if you think you ought to bail

Chris Hogan / she had to run\
 last night’d been a lot of fun\
 but now it’s french / a little tense\
 she hadn’t done the reading\
 there she sat / hoped to pass\
 didn’t think to face the fact\
 that oh by gosh o lack o lass\
 colombia is bleeding\
 walkin’ down / off the bus\
 Vicky Lucas crossed campus was\
 thinkin’ how she’s made it now\
 that successful feeling\
 walked by fast / hoped to pass no clue ‘bout the shirt she has\
 and while she’s sittin’ in lit class\
 colombia is bleeding

the union is in town\
 and there they are\
 the forces come on down\
 then a scream

everybody knows protesters are those\
 schmoes who don’t have a life\
 see these businessmen seeking profit and\
 have to suffer such strife\
 i don’t wanna know if the world is flat\
 or you can’t check your email\
 i don’t wanna know [if your cell won’t work or that guy’s a
jerk](http://atrios.blogspot.com/2005_07_31_atrios_archive.html#112307924462696350)\
 or if you think you ought to bail

generalize, proselytize, verbs were spillin’ out their sides\
 as Charles Eise buys his supplies gets ready for a meeting\
 tried for track / hit the mat\
 didn’t think to face the fact\
 that while he’s thinkin’ “man, that’s wack!”\
 colombia is bleeding\
 quite a snob he didn’t tip\
 nice guy Rob watched the eclipse\
 and looked around / “i’ve made it now\
 i’m just so glad to be here”\
 made a pass / got hand slapped\
 didn’t think to face the fact\
 that while he’s mackin’ on that ass\
 colombia is bleeding

the catholic religion\
[decides to help the
poor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberation_theology)\
 while we rename the school in\
[which we train the men](http://www.soaw.org/) and\
 then a scream

they’re just criminals / make good worker cells\
[pushing drugs and
disease](http://www.chomsky.info/interviews/20020208.htm)\
 empire’s pretty fun / we got power, son\
[we can do as we
please](http://www.afn.org/~iguana/archives/2003_11/20031112.html)\
 i don’t wanna know ‘bout your drug war claims\
 or how it’s gonna fail\
 i don’t wanna know if you need to show you’re a real madman\
 or you think you’re gonna bail\
 hail!

Tee-Tee Green / pressed mezzanine\
 ended up beside the team\
 and gave a cheer / got some beers\
 with friends who started drinkin’\
 back with Zach said “i look fat”\
 didn’t think to face the fact\
 that while she’s under self-attack\
 colombia is bleeding\
 Rodney J. began to pray\
 his momma lost her life that day\
 had been a year / it wasn’t clear\
 if he was safe or screamin’\
 as he jabbed the bible flap\
 he didn’t think to face the beast\
 of profiteering that killed the priest\
 colombia is bleeding

this is america


Some Announcements
==================

January 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/webproductivity)

* * * * *

My new Python web application library, [web.py](http://webpy.org/), is
out.

[An essay of mine about
productivity](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity) has made the
rounds. I’m not sure it’s finished, but lots of people have already read
it and loved it, so I thought I might as well tell you about it.

On a similar note, over the winter break I wrote a program called
[arcget](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/arcget/) to download web sites from
the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine. There are still a few more
changes I’d like to make, but I’m unlikely to get to them anytime soon.

The reason I built arcget was so I could put up the [Lingua Franca
archive](http://linguafranca.mirror.theinfo.org/). Lingua Franca was a
fantastic magazine about academic life that ran for several years before
going bust in the recession. Their website, with many of their fantastic
articles, sadly disappeared with it (and thus from Google).

Now you can read such classics as [Oh My
Darwin!](http://linguafranca.mirror.theinfo.org/9911/darwin.html), [A
Most Dangerous
Method](http://linguafranca.mirror.theinfo.org/9402/method.html), and
[Who Owns The
Sixties?](http://linguafranca.mirror.theinfo.org/9605/sixties.html).

Of course, these and many others are collected into the wonderful
collection *[Quick
Studies](http://www.amazon.com/o/ASIN/0374528632/coolbooks02)* which,
along, with [Boob
Jubilee](http://www.amazon.com/o/ASIN/0393324303/coolbooks02) is some of
the most enjoyable and edifying material out there — combining both
dazzlingly intriguing writing with meaty subjects.

Anyway, that should keep you busy for a while.


Say Goodbye to Embarrassment
============================

January 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/emotions)

* * * * *

I’ve decided to stop being embarrassed. I’m saying goodbye to the whole
thing: that growing suspicion as the moment approaches, that sense of
realization when it comes, that rush of blood reddening your cheeks,
that brief but powerful desire to jump out of your own skin, and then
finally that attempt big fake smile trying to cover it all. Sure, it was
fun for a while, but I think it’s outlived its usefulness. It’s time for
embarrassment to go.

Turning off an emotion is always a tough decision. I remember how a
couple years ago I decided to say goodbye to anger. Sure, anger has its
bright moments — you haven’t really lived until you’ve known that
special joy of hurling a chair across the room — but it’s also quite
time-consuming. Every time someone comes up and hits you, you have to
run around chasing after them. And once you start getting angry it’s
hard to stop — an angry person doesn’t really want to calm down, it sort
of *enjoys* being angry. So I finally decided to get rid of the whole
thing. And you know what? I haven’t regretted the decision one bit.

Regret — that’s another interesting emotion. I mean, what purpose does
it really serve? “There’s no use crying over spilled milk,” my mom once
told me when I started sobbing after I got milk all over the floor while
trying to make cereal. “I suppose that’s true,” I replied between sobs.
“Although maybe my tears will dilute the milk and make it stick to the
floor less.” But I was wrong — the milk stayed just as sticky. So maybe
regret should be the next one to go.

But actually, I think it’s going to be frustration. It’s not discussed
much, but frustration is really quite distracting. You’re trying to
solve some difficult problem but it’s just not working. Instead of
taking a moment to try and think of the solution, you just keep getting
more and more frustrated until you start jumping up and down and
smashing various things. So not only do you waste time jumping, but you
also have to pay to replace the stuff you smashed. It’s really a net
loss.

But that’s a decision for another time. Today it’s time for
embarrassment to join anger in the wastebasket of deactivated emotions.
It might take some getting used to at first — when friends try to tease
me about something I’ll probably start to react before realizing there’s
just no need for it anymore — but before long I’m sure it will seem
normal. Even if I’m a less normal person for it.


In His Own Words 2
==================

January 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mlk2)

* * * * *

> I must confess that over the past few years I have been gravely
> disappointed with the white moderate. I have almost reached the
> regrettable conclusion that the Negro’s great stumbling block in his
> stride toward freedom is not the White Citizen’s Councilor or the Ku
> Klux Klanner, but the white moderate, who is more devoted to “order”
> than to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence of
> tension to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who
> constantly says: “I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I cannot
> agree with your methods of direct action”; who paternalistically
> believes he can set the timetable for another man’s freedom; who lives
> by a mythical concept of time and who constantly advises the Negro to
> wait for a “more convenient season.”

(Martin Luther King, Jr., [Letter from Birmingham
Jail](http://www.nobelprizes.com/nobel/peace/MLK-jail.html))

One year ago: [In His Own Words](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001512).


More MLKJ Day
=============

January 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mlk22)

* * * * *

[This episode of *The Boondocks*](http://www.mininova.org/tor/200949)
about Martin Luther King, Jr. is amazing. Humorous, thoughtful, deeply
touching. It provides a glimpse of what truly emancipatory television
might look like.


The Disappearance of Thought
============================

January 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/postmankid)

* * * * *

[![book
cover](image1_postmankid)](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0679751661.01._SCLZZZZZZZ_.jpg)

Neil Postman is generally considered a thoughtful liberal critic of
technology and its deleterious effect on our culture. My friends praise
his attacks on television and rethinking of education. But it’s hard for
me to take him seriously after reading his *The Disappearance of
Childhood*, in which he argues (p. 87) that television is bad because it
teaches children homosexuality is normal and praises the Moral Majority
as being the only group to realize this important truth. And true, he
admits it’s an exaggeration to say “such a situation necessarily and
categorically signifies cultural degeneration”, he does insist it
clearly “poses dangers”.

Postman’s argument is that childhood is the creation of the printing
press, which led to a culture in which learning to read was necessary to
become an adult, and thus children became a separate group. In the same
way, he argues, the emergence of television, which requires no special
training to view, is destroying the distinction between children and
adults and bringing us back to that pre-literate age.

Not once does Postman ever explain why this should be considered a bad
thing. Instead, his book simply assumes it’s obvious that we need to
pretend to keep kids from naughty words (even though they know them
anyway), that we need to make it hard for kids to learn about sex, that
we need to pretend for them that political leaders are infallible, etc.

One is almost tempted to believe the book is tounge-in-cheek, an
impression assisted by the preface to the second edition — the only
place where actual children are ever considered — which quotes letters
Postman has received from students who have read portions of the book
and disagree completely with his argument that childhood is
disappearing. They don’t, however, criticize childhood itself, so
Postman assumes they are in favor of it and praises them as “a force in
preserving childhood”, a sort of “moral majority”.

And this, in miniature, is the problem with the whole book. Postman
investigates the history of childhood and modern thought, finding it a
creation of the printing press, and thus a social and not a biological
entity. But instead of investigating whether the result was good or bad,
he simply ignores his own work and proceeds directly to assuming it must
be good. What we are witnessing here is not the disappearance of
childhood, but the disappearance of thought.

[image1_postmankid]: image1_postmankid.jpg

Wassup?
=======

March 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wassup)

* * * * *

Wow, it’s been a long time since we last talked. In fairness, I’ve been
hard at work. As you probably know, for a long time I’ve been working on
a startup called [infogami](http://infogami.com/). If you’re interested
in the full story, [I’ve written a long blog post about
it](http://infogami.com/blog/introduction) but in short, last November I
joined the amazing team behind [reddit](http://reddit.com/), merging our
two companies.

Then, about a month ago, I quietly released the first version of
[infogami](http://infogami.com/) to the public. It was a very early
version with hardly any features and I didn’t tell anyone about it, but
we still got several thousand sites created using the software.

Since then, I’ve kept my promise of releasing a new feature every day,
steadily improving the site bit by bit. There are a couple things I’m
particularly proud of, including our advanced permissions system which
gives detailed control over exactly who can do what with your site and
[the blame feature](http://infogami.com/blog/blame) that was put
together by my friends Zack Coburn and Sean B. Palmer which shows
exactly who wrote what in a document. And of course there’s much more to
come.

Of course, working on just one project all the time is a little much, so
I’ve been taking little breaks to work on new hacks. This weekend I
built a little site called (for now, at least) [Simple
Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/). I was annoyed with how slow it was
to search Amazon — first you have to load their complicated front page,
type in your search in the tiny hidden box, then click the link to
filter it just for books and so on. With Simple Amazon, you just go to a
URL like:

[http://books.theinfo.org/lisp](http://books.theinfo.org/lisp)

and you get a listing of lisp books superfast with covers and links to
price checks. You can also use links like:

[http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262011530](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262011530)

to provide shorter links to Amazon.

Anyway, I guess that’s about it for now. If you’re interested in
following my more day-to-day work, I’m publishing company-related stuff
over on the [infogami blog](http://infogami.com/blog/). Currently it’s
mostly just reports about our new features, but I hope to write more
about the startup life and things like that.

All the best!


What It Means To Be An Intellectual
===================================

April 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intellectuals)

* * * * *

A friend sent me an email this morning and at the end of it, almost as
an afterthought, he responded to a quote I’d sent him from an author
praising books. “He would say that,” my friend replied, “he’s a writer.”

I want to quibble with this statement — how is it that we can dismiss
someone’s argument simply because of their job? — but doing so would
seem bizarre. There’s a social norm that how much we discuss something
should be roughly proportional to its importance. Mountains of print may
be spilled on the issues of international relations but spending a
couple emails [discussing
punctuation](http://daringfireball.net/2003/03/antialiasing) would seem
dreadfully bizarre.

There’s just one problem: I *enjoy* deep discussions of punctuation and
other trivialities. I could try to justify this taste — some argument
that we should think about everything we do so that we don’t do
everything we think about — but why bother? Do I have to justify
enjoying certain television shows as well? At some point, isn’t pure
enjoyment just enough? After all, [time isn’t
fungible](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity).

But of course, the same drive that leads me to question punctuation
leads me to question the drive itself, and thus this essay.

What is “this drive”? It’s the tendency to not simply accept things as
they are but to want to think about them, to understand them. To not be
content to simply feel sad but [to ask what sadness
means](http://www.plover.com/blog/aliens/emotions.html). To not just get
a bus pass but [to think about the economic reasons getting a bus pass
makes
sense](http://vitanuova.loyalty.org/weblog/nb.cgi/view/vitanuova/2005/11/04/0).
I call this tendency the intellectual.

The word “intellectual” has a bit of a bad rap. When I think of the word
I hear a man with a southern accent sneering at it. But this stain seems
appropriate — *the idea* has a bad rap.

And why is that? One reason is that many people simply don’t like to
think about things. Perhaps it reminds them of school, which they didn’t
enjoy, and they don’t want to go back there. Another is that they’re
busy people — men of action — and they don’t have time to sit and think
about every little detail. But mostly it’s just because they think it’s
a waste of time. What’s the point? What difference does it make what you
think about punctuation? It’s not going to affect anything.

This is the argument that’s often used when demonizing intellectuals. As
Thomas Frank summarizes the argument:

> The same bunch of sneaking intellectuals are responsible for the
> content of Hollywood movies and for the income tax, by which they
> steal from the rest of us. They do no useful work, producing nothing
> but movies and newspaper columns while they freeload on the labor of
> others. (116)

When I think of intellectuals, though, I don’t really think of Hollywood
producers or politicians or even newspaper columnists. But the people I
do think of seem to have something else in common. They don’t just love
thinking, they love language. They love its tricks and intricacies, its
games, the way it gets written down, the books it gets written into, the
libraries those books are in, and the typography those books use.

Upon reflection this makes perfect sense. Language is the medium of
thought and so it’s no surprise that someone who spends a lot of time
thinking spends a lot of time thinking about how to communicate their
thoughts as well. And indeed, all the intellectuals that come to mind
write, not because they have to or get paid to, but simply for its own
sake. What good is thinking if you can’t share?

This contrasts with how intellectuals are commonly thought of — namely
as pretentious elitist snobs. But real intellectuals, at least in the
sense I’m using the term, are anything but. They love nothing more than
explaining their ideas so that anyone who’s interested can understand
them. They only seem pretentious because discussing such things is so
bizarre.

This stereotype actually seems more like the caricature of the academic
than the intellectual. (It’s perhaps worth noting that most of the
intellectuals I can think of *aren’t* academics or at least have left
the academy.) Far from being intellectuals, academics are encouraged to
be almost the opposite. Instead of trying to explain things simply,
they’re rewarded for making them seem more complicated. Instead of
trying to learn about everything, they’re forced to focus in on their
little subdiscipline. Instead of loving books, they have to love gabbing
— up in front of class or at office hour with students or at
professional conferences or faculty meetings.

Not that there’s anything wrong with that. At the beginning I declined
to justify my being an intellectual on any grounds other than pure
personal enjoyment. And here, at the end, I can’t think of any better
justification. Certainly people should think deeply about their actions
and the world’s problems and other important topics. But the other ones?
That’s little more than personal preference.


Do Faces Cause Depression?: Self-Experimentation in Science
===========================================================

April 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/facedepress)

* * * * *

It all started, Seth Roberts says, when he wanted more practice doing
experiments. The closest thing at hand was himself. He was trying to
treat his acne and, although convinced that the pills were effective and
the cream was not, he decided to chart their effectiveness anyway for
practice. The results were the exact opposite of what he expected — the
cream helped and the pills did not. His acne went away and Roberts went
looking for bigger problems to solve.

* * * * *

It’s obvious that sleep follows some sort of circular rhythm, an inner
biological clock that makes us tired at the end of the day and refreshed
at the beginning. This is the clock that gets thrown off when we travel
and thus causes jet lag, for example. But what if other things mess with
the clock than simply when we go to sleep?

It wasn’t simply academic for Roberts, who frustrated from a serious
bout of “early awakening”, in which he’d wake up around 4am feeling
tired but unable to get back to sleep for another couple of hours.
Roberts searched for a way to cure his problem but none of the standard
methods seemed appropriate. So he decided to research the subject.

A 1979 study of people in caves suggested that contact with other people
affected when we fell asleep and a 1985 survey of daily activities in 12
countries led to another clue: Americans were much more often awake
around midnight than people in any other country and the only
distinguishing factor seemed to be late-night television. Perhaps,
Roberts thought, watching television could influence sleeping rhythm?

The most popular late-night television show at the time the study was
done was the *The Tonight Show*, with its person-heavy monologue. So one
morning Roberts decided to watch Jay Leno and David Letterman’s
monologues. It seemed to have no impact; an otherwise normal day. But
the *next* morning he woke up feeling great.

It was hard to believe that the television show could be responsible, so
Roberts decided to formalize the study. Every hour he’d write down three
numbers between 0 and 100 to measure how unhappy/happy,
irritable/serene, and reluctant/eager he was. And then he tried turning
the TV watching on and off again to see if it impacted his mood. It did
— he always felt better the next day. So he tried adjusting the show and
television set, finding that, despite his love for *The Simpsons*,
life-size human faces at about a meter away for 30 minutes worked best.

I have to concede, at this point, that the results sound fairly absurd
and unbelievable. But reading [Roberts’s papers on the
subject](http://sethroberts.net/self-experiment/), what’s striking is
how careful he is about the subject. An actual psychologist, publishing
in psychology journals, he’s taken into account every objection. The
results *cannot* be, as one would first expect, simply self-induced by
his own wishes. For one, Roberts took quantitative notes, so his memory
couldn’t be playing tricks on him. For another, the size of the
difference was too large to be explained through normal explanations. If
Roberts could simply *will* himself into waking up happy, why hadn’t he
done it before? Nor could such an explanation explain the numbers’s
careful sensitivity to how similar the TV watching was to human face
contact, especially since Roberts was originally hoping to be able to
watch his favorite shows, not face-heavy ones like *Charlie Rose*.

He also began noticing something he wasn’t expecting — his mood wasn’t
just raised the next morning, it was lowered that night. This graph
shows the pattern:

![Graph of mood over the course of 48 hours based on whether faces were
seen or not.](image1_facedepress)

Mood spikes up from 6am to noon, stays high during the day, and then
takes a dive around 6pm. (When not seeing faces, mood stays flat.)

And what about all those people who watched TV at night? Roberts found
that watching TV after 6pm also reduced mood, with the effect more
pronounced the later it was watched.

So what’s going on? If you look at faces in the morning, you feel worse
12 hours later but better 24 hours later. But the effect is muted if you
see faces in the evening. Roberts theorizes that your body is using the
faces to set its inner mood clock, which works similarly to its inner
tiredness clock. You want to be happy during the day (as opposed to the
night), but how do you tell when the day starts? The body assumes that
you gab with people when you wake up, so it uses seeing other faces as a
way to synchronize the clock. Of course, you want to make sure you’ve
got the timing right on the nighttime side as well, so if you see faces
late in the evening it tries to tweak the clock then as well.

This is consistent with what we know from other sources about
depression. Depression is highly correlated with insomnia as well as
social isolation and is often treated by disturbing sleep. The Amish,
who eat breakfast communally and go to bed very early, have 1/100th the
rate of depression as other Americans. And depression rates increased by
10 times in the 1900s, around the same time radio/TV, electric lighting,
and other such things became common.

I’m hoping to get a chance to test this myself, but it sure appears that
one easy way to improve mood is to look at faces in the morning.

* * * * *

Of course, even more than mood (which is generally considered difficult
to tweak) people want to improve their look. And Roberts has done
research on this as well, concluding that the body uses a similar
internal system to measure the ideal weight. The result is his
Shangri-La Diet which uses similar techniques to trick the body’s
internal system to cut down on appetite. His book on the subject, [*The
Shangri-La Diet*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640), comes out
this week. It’s been hailed as a diet book unlike any other. More on
that next time.

[image1_facedepress]: image1_facedepress.jpg

The Miracle Diet
================

April 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet)

* * * * *

[![](image1_miraclediet)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640)

You eat food that has calories. And you do things that burn calories.
The calories left over get stored as fat. And thus, the typical advice
for losing weight: eat less, exercise more. Fewer calories are eaten and
more are burned and so the result is less fat. There’s just one problem:
that’s really hard. To burn enough calories to lose a lot of weight, you
really have to put an awful lot of time into it. And if you try to eat
less, your body just feels hungry all the time, because it wants more.

So what if instead of forcing your body to eat less, you teach your body
to *want* less. After all, it’s clear that it’s obesity, not lack of
fat, that’s the health problem. So getting your body to want less food
would be a good thing. And it would make dieting incredibly easy too —
instead of fighting to count calories or avoid eating certain foods, you
do nothing at all; you’re just not interested in eating.

It sounds like a pipe dream, but Seth Roberts argues that it’s possible.
Drawing on the results of a number of studies with rats, his own
experiments on himself, and the best research on nutrition and weight
loss, he’s developed a theory of how the body decides what it feels like
eating.

Our body’s weight, he says, is regulated by a “set point”, like the
setting on a thermostat. If our weight is lower than our internal set
point, we feel hungry; higher, we feel full. So if you want to weigh
less, all you need to do is lower your body’s set point. Your body will
stop being hungry, you’ll burn the fat you already have, and your weight
will go down.

But how would you do that? Roberts argues that a person’s set point
isn’t fixed, instead it goes up and down based on what they eat. After
all, the whole reason the body stores up calories when food is abundant
is so it can use them in “lean years”, when food is scarce. So it would
make sense for a person’s set point to go up when food is abundant
(allowing them to build up fat) and down when it’s scarce (so they don’t
feel hungry all the time).

The problem, of course, is that food is never scarce anymore. You can
always just go to McDonald’s. The body is storing up for an eventuality
that will never come. So how do you get it to stop? Maybe you could
trick it into thinking food was scarce.

This is where Roberts’s big insight comes — he argues that we use a
Pavlovian sort of flavor-conditioning system to see whether food is
scarce. If we eat foods frequently, we grow to like their taste, and
thus our brain realizes we’re eating them out of choice and raises the
set point. On the other hand, if we eat new foods or foods with little
taste, our brain assumes we’re eating them because there’s nothing else
around and the set point is lowered.

And thus, the way to lower your set point: eat foods with no taste. Of
course, they have to have calories as well, so Roberts’s preferred
suggestion is extra-light olive oil (ELOO), which is basically just oil
with absolutely no taste. Your body gets the calories but it doesn’t get
the taste, so the set point goes lower every time you eat it.

It all seems crazy, but Roberts is sort of a crazy guy, so he decided to
test it. He started taking a couple hundred tasteless calories every
day. Almost immediately, he begun feeling less hungry. He started eating
one meal every other day, even while still exercising, and felt great.
He lost a pound of weight a week with no effort. He lost so much weight
that his friends started telling him that he looked too thin, so he
started taking less tasteless calories and put some weight back on. It
was amazing; a diet plan unlike any other.

He told friends about it and it worked for them too. It was written up
in *The New York Times* and readers wrote in with letters saying it was
working for them. Blogs started to keep track of people’s stories —
almost all successful. And now he has a new book yesterday, *The
Shangri-La Diet*, which explains how you can do it to.

The book is odd, in that it looks pretty much like any other silly diet
book, but the contents are rather different. Although clearly rushed,
the book has an appendix of scientific studies using rats to back up its
arguments about theory and happily features the stories of people who
tried the diet and found it didn’t work along with those who tried the
diet and found it did.

Obviously, such anecdotal evidence isn’t enough to prove the system
works, but it does make it intriguing enough to try. I’ve started taking
a couple tablespoons of extra light olive oil and already I found myself
skipping a meal, something I’ve never been able to do before. We’ll see
how it goes.

-   [Buy the book from Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640)


[image1_miraclediet]: image1_miraclediet.jpg

A Future Without Fat
====================

April 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture)

* * * * *

I’ve been on [the Shangri-La
diet](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet) long enough to convince
myself that there’s definitely something to it. Yesterday, for example,
I spent all morning moving furniture (we’re moving to a new apartment)
and around lunch time I got invited to lunch at a favorite pizza place
with a friend and I jogged all the way there. Normally, at this point,
I’d be famished and devour half a pizza. This time, I wasn’t hungry at
all (but I had a slice out of politeness).

Of course, there’s no reason my particular anecdotes should be more
convincing than any others, but they are convincing to me, so I’d like
to move from discussing the diet to discussing its implications. Weight
and trying to lose it is a huge part of American culture and a system
that makes doing it trivially easy will have far-reaching effects.

The most basic, it would seem, is more thin people. There’s clearly an
enormous number of people who want to lose weight. A lot are so
desperate that they will try any number of painful and crazy tactics,
from Slim-Fast shakes to Atkins meals, that are touted as helping.
Obviously these people will try the diet.

But also a large number of people (like myself) who see themselves as
too skeptical to fall for a fad diet or too lazy to jump through its
hoops will try this diet, since it’s both scientifically proven (or will
be, after further clinical trials) and super-easy. And unlike Atkins,
there are few concerns about nutritional dangers — the diet doesn’t
require you to change the balance of foods you eat, just the quantitity
— so a bunch more reasons not to do it disappear.

As it takes off, commercial products will soon follow — branded
pocket-sized flasks of ELOO, for example. The media will do stories on
this latest craze and the ideas behind it. Clinical trials will
demonstrate its effectiveness and suggest areas for further research,
which will lead to it being refined. And popular culture will likely try
to deal with the results.

Among those results: lots of people you know getting thin. It’s
difficult to imagine what this is going to be like. The fat guy at the
office won’t be fat anymore. That cute-but-slightly-overweight girl
you’ve had your eye on won’t be slightly overweight anymore. Social
dynamics will be seriously disrupted in a way that, to my knowledge, has
no analog. People have gotten taller, and thinner, and prettier over
time, to be sure, but never quite this fast.

The flip side of the drive to be thinner is the discrimination against
those who are fat. American culture is simply vicious towards the less
fortunate. You’re poor because you’re lazy, it says, and you’re fat for
the same reason. If only you got some exercise or ate better, you’d look
fine. It’s your own damn fault and there’s nothing wrong with me looking
down on you for it.

If the theory behind the diet is correct, however, this just isn’t so.
Fat people are that way simply because their body’s set point is too
high. That’s not really anything you can blame them for and it’s also
something that, before the diet, was really hard to fix. They live with
a burden of wanting to eat that thin people, with their lower set point,
never have to deal with. And the entire time they’ve been struggling,
they’ve been told it’s simply their own damn fault. (As I noted, their
situation mirrors that of the poor.)

Of course, it’s unlikely our culture will ever notice the horrors its
committed against fat people. Instead, the diet is likely to make it
even more vicious. Now that there’s a simple easy way to get thin,
anyone who refuses to use it will be turned against with serious scorn.
Being fat may become as much of a social rudity as being a smoker, with
strangers feeling that they can lecture you about your unhealthy
lifestyle in public. It’ll be pure torture.

But, I have no doubt, it’ll work. Sipping ELOO is much easier than
quitting smoking and tons of people are doing the latter. And so the
last few overweight people will be pushed to join the pack. While it’s
unlikely that obesity will be entirely eradicated, it’s hard to imagine
the last few hangers-on (perhaps those for whom the diet doesn’t work or
who can’t do it for some reason) making up a significant sect of the
population.

The diet book itself saves most of its vision for future generations
who, it suggests, will never have to think about obesity at all because
the new science behind the diet will allow us to build it right into our
foods, so that we will simply never get fat in the first place.
Certainly, at a minimum, children’s set points will be regulated from a
very early age (what parent wouldn’t want to spare their child from
fat-kid teasing?) and they’ll likely never even consider another
possibility.

To our children, obesity will probably seem like just another
relatively-rare disease, like a learning disability or a speech
impediment. They’ll look back at movies from our time and think— well,
actually, they won’t notice anything because we’ve already removed the
fat people from them.


Book Reviews
============

May 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/amareview)

* * * * *

Don’t know if anyone’s interested, but I’ve just written [a bunch of
reviews for
Amazon](http://www.amazon.com/gp/cdp/member-reviews/A3CNKIV16YN14Z/).


Fat Backlash
============

May 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatbacklash)

* * * * *

*They told me exercise and diet\
 If I would try it, would cure my ills\
 But though I’m already past my quota\
 I want another load o’ those magic pills*\
 — They Might Be Giants, “[Renew My
Subscription](http://www.tmbw.net/wiki/index.php/Renew_My_Subscription)”

The response to [my suggestion that there might be a simple and painless
way to lose weight](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet) brought
some interesting responses. Many people who wrote in were excited about
it or were actually trying it. But some of the rest were downright
hostile.

tuomov wrote:

> No pain, no loss. Forget all these bullshit weight-loss manuals. Those
> four words above summarise all that you need to know. The rest is just
> pain management and scheduling. If you don’t feel hungry occasionally,
> you’re not losing weight.

And Martijn commented:

> But how is this healthy? This diet sounds like a trick to fool your
> body. […] Why not just eat well? […] Somehow people want to lose
> weight the easy way, pff.. just prooves how lazy this ‘McDonalds’
> generation has become.

Such comments strike me as slightly odd. “Eat better” has been the diet
advice for as long as I can remember and undoubtedly everyone overweight
has heard it by now. And yet, as these writers clearly know, obesity is,
as I understand it, an epidemic in this country. So this supposed
solution clearly isn’t working. Yes, it might work in the sense that if
everyone followed it they’d be fine (although even that is somewhat
unclear), but plainly it’s too hard to follow. If our goal is to
actually stop obesity, then we’re failing.

But I suspect for some people, that isn’t the goal. And Martijn’s last
sentence hints at this. In [my last
piece](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture) I drew an analogy
between being poor and being fat. And I think this rage at an easy way
to lose weight parallels the rage we see at “government handouts” that
provide an “easy way out” of being poor.

(To be clear, I’m talking about people who are opposed to easy ways to
lose weight in general; not the people who were skeptical about this
diet in particular or sick of fad diets altogether. Such reactions are
perfectly right and reasonable.)

This is one thing I didn’t really predict in my last piece on the
subject, but undoubtedly such far-reaching changes will also have their
backlash. People who have spent their whole lives putting themselves
through the pain of starvation and strenuous exercise to maintain their
physique are undoubtedly going to be a little upset to figure out it was
all unnecessary. It would be bad enough if it was some new invention
that made fat disappear — after all, it hadn’t been invented yet when
they’d gone through all that so there was no way they could take
advantage of it. But olive oil and sugar water? That’s been around
forever! How could they have missed it?

Ronald Reagan got elected campaigning against imaginary “welfare queens”
in supposed-Cadillacs. Will right-wing politicians of the future rail
against those who take the easy way out of being fat?

One major difference is that economics is at least thought to be a
zero-sum game. Those welfare queens are taking “*your money*”, in the
form of taxes. But you lose nothing if more people get thin. By the same
token, there’s not a whole lot the government can do about this problem.
The welfare payments were theirs, so they could cut them (as Clinton
savagely did) but what’s the government going to do about the diet? Ban
olive oil?

Perhaps instead we’ll see social pressure. The major visible difference
between someone on the diet and someone who isn’t (considering that the
olive oil can be taken in private) is that someone who’s on the diet
simply doesn’t eat much. But eating is a major social function, around
which much business and friendship is conducted. Perhaps backlash
members will heap scorn on those who skip lunch or eat little, perhaps
even ostracizing them until they start eating like normal (and thus
weakening the effects of the diet).

I’ve seen a little bit of this myself — as a supertaster, my tastes are
sufficiently strange that when eating with new people I’m often asked
about my choice of food and then queried and lightly mocked for my
explanation. It’s not so bad and I’m sure people mean perfectly well by
it, but it is a cost and if people are actually angry about the diet, it
may get worse.

So while actually being fat may go away easily, the stigma might be a
little harder to erase.


Public Service Announcement
===========================

May 10, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/legalbribes)

* * * * *

These are sad days for American democracy. Ohio congressman [Bob
Ney](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bob_Ney#Controversies) took bribes of
tens of thousands of dollars in contributions and gifts. California
congressman [Duke
Cunningham](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duke_Cunningham#Plea_agreement)
is in jail after forfeiting \$1.8 million in bribes. And Louisiana
congressman [William
Jefferson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Jefferson) is giving up \$1
million in bribes after [an FBI raid on his house found \$90,000 in a
freezer](http://harpers.org/sb-williamjefferson-21-9384239.html).

In these days of widespread corruption and bribery, it is important to
remember that no, this is not how our great democracy is supposed to
work. The bribery is supposed to be [much more
subtle](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001458) — not to mention legal.


The Book That Changed My Life
=============================

May 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/epiphany)

* * * * *

Two years ago this summer I read a book that changed the entire way I
see the world. I had been researching various topics — law, politics,
the media — and become more and more convinced that something was
seriously wrong. Politicians, I was shocked to discover, weren’t
actually doing what the people wanted. And the media, my research found,
didn’t really care much about that, preferring to focus on such things
as posters and polls.

As I thought about this more, its implications struck me as larger and
larger. But I still had no bigger picture to fit them in. The media was
simply doing a bad job, leading people to be confused. We just had to
pressure them to do better and democracy would be restored.

Then, one night, I watched the film *Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky
and the Media* (I think it had come up in my Netflix queue). First off,
it’s simply an amazingly-good film. I’ve watched it several times now
and each time I’m utterly entranced. It’s undoubtedly the best
documentary I’ve seen, weaving together all sorts of clever tricks to
enlighten and entertain.

Second, it makes shocking points. I didn’t understand all of what it was
saying at the time, but I understood enough to realize that something
was severely amiss. The core of the film is a case study of Indonesia’s
brutal invasion of the country of East Timor. The US personally gave the
green light to the invasion and provided the weapons, which allowed
Indonesia to massacre the population in an occupation that, per capita,
ranks with the Holocaust. And the US media ignores it and when they do
cover it, inevitably distorts it.

Shocked and puzzled by the film, I was eager to learn more. Noam Chomsky
has dozens of books but I was fortunate to choose to read *Understanding
Power*, a thick paperback I picked up at the library. Edited by Peter
Mitchell and John Schoeffel, two public defenders in New York, the book
is a collection of transcripts of group discussions with Chomsky.

Chomsky lays out the facts in a conversational style, telling stories
and explaining things in response to questions from the groups, covering
an incredibly wide range of topics. And on every single one, what he
tells you is completely shocking, at odds with everything you know,
turning the way you see things upside-down. Mitchell and Schoeffel know
you’re unlikely to believe these things, so they’ve carefully footnoted
and documented every claim, providing blockquote excerpts from the
original sources to establish them.

Each story, individually, can be dismissed as some weird oddity, like
what I’d learned about the media focusing more on posters than on
policy. But seeing them all together, you can’t help but begin to tease
out the larger picture, to ask yourself what’s behind all these
disparate things, and what that means for the way we see the world.

Reading the book, I felt as if my mind was rocked by explosions. At
times the ideas were too much that I literally had to lie down. (I’m not
the only one to feel this way — Norman Finkelstein noted that when he
went through a similar experience, “It was a totally crushing experience
for me. … My world literally caved in. And there were quite a number of
weeks where … I just was in bed, totally devastated.”) I remember
vividly clutching at the door to my room, trying to hold on to something
while the world spun around.

For weeks afterwards, everything I saw was in a different light. Every
time I saw a newspaper or magazine or person on TV, I questioned what I
thought knew about them, wondered how they fit into this new picture.
Questions that had puzzled me for years suddenly began making sense in
this new world. I reconsidered everyone I knew, everything I thought I’d
learned. And I found I didn’t have much company.

It’s taken me two years to write about this experience, not without
reason. One terrifying side effect of learning the world isn’t the way
you think is that it leaves you all alone. And when you try to describe
your new worldview to people, it either comes out sounding unsurprising
(“yeah, sure, everyone knows the media’s got problems”) or like pure
lunacy and people slowly back away.

Ever since then, I’ve realized that I need to spend my life working to
fix the shocking brokenness I’d discovered. And the best way to do that,
I concluded, was to try to share what I’d discovered with others. I
couldn’t just tell them it straight out, I knew, so I had to provide the
hard evidence. So I started working on a book to do just that. (I’m
looking for people to help, if you’re interested.)

It’s been two years now and my mind has settled down some. I’ve learned
a bunch more but, despite my best efforts, haven’t found any problems
with this frightening new world view. After all this time, I’m finally
ready to talk about what happened with some distance and I hope I’m now
able to begin work on my book in earnest.

It was a major change, but I wouldn’t give it up for anything.

-   [*Understanding Power* on
    Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1565847032)
-   [The *Understanding Power* web site](http://understandingpower.com/)
-   [*Manufacturing Consent* DVD on
    Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B00005Y726)
-   [*Manufacturing Consent*
    torrent](http://www.torrentspy.com/torrent/341194/Manufacturing_Consent_Noam_Chomsky_and_the_Media_1993_DVD_Rip_avi)
-   [companion book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1551640023)



The Conservative Nanny State
============================

May 22, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cns)

* * * * *

[![](image1_cns)](http://www.conservativenannystate.org/)

For years, progressives have watched as both Democratic and Republican
administrations have taken away what little remained of economic
liberalism in this country. Bill Clinton, for example, took away what
meager assistance the government paid to poor single mothers, signed
NAFTA, and begun attempting [to chip away at Social
Security](http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/fedagencies/jan-june98/security_4-7a.html).

But even worse than these policy defeats are the conceptual defeats that
underly them. As cognitive scientist [George Lakoff has
argued](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001118) people think about
politics through conceptual moral frames, and the conservatives have
been masterful at creating frames for their policies. If the left wants
to fight back, they’re going to have to create frames of their own.

Enter Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy
Research and one of the people instrumental in fighting back against the
most recent attempt to privatize social security (as author *Social
Security: The Phony Crisis* he had plenty of facts to demonstrate that
the crisis was, in fact, phony). He has a new book out, *The
Conservative Nanny State: How the Wealthy Use the Government to Stay
Rich and Get Richer*, which takes decades of conservative frames and
stands them on their head. (Disclosure: I liked the book so much I
converted it to HTML for them and was sent a free paperback copy in
return.)

His most fundamental point is that conservatives are *not* generally in
favor of market outcomes. For far too long, he argues, the left has been
content with the notion that conservatives want the market to do what it
pleases while liberals want some government intervention to protect
people from its excesses.

*No way!*, says Baker. Conservatives *love* big government — only they
use it to give money to the rich instead of the poor. Thus the
conservative nanny state of the title, always looking out for crybaby
moneybags to help.

Take, for example, trade policy. The conservative nanny state is more
than happy to sign free trade agreements that let manufacturing jobs in
the United States flee offshore. And they’re happy to let immigrant
workers come into the country to replace dishwashers and day laborers.
But when it comes to the professional class, like doctors, lawyers,
economists, journalists, and other professionals, *oh no!*, the
conservative nanny state does everything it can (through licensing and
immigration policy) to keep foreign workers out.

This doesn’t just help the doctors, it hurts all of us because it means
we have to pay more for health care. NAFTA boosters estimate that the
entire agreement saved us \$8 billion dollars a year. Using competition
to bring only doctor’s salaries down the levels seen in Europe would
save us *eighty* billion dollars — nearly \$700 per family per year,
just from improved prices for doctor’s. You’d see similar amounts from
other major professions.

Baker’s book is also one of the few to reveal the shocking secret behind
the Federal Reserve Board you always hear messing with interest rates on
the news. This unaccountable technocracy, most of whose members are
appointed by banks, uses its power over interest rates to drive the
economy into a recession so that wages won’t get too high. That’s right,
the government tries to slow down the economy so that you get paid less.
(Full details are in the book.)

Baker’s book is also chock-full of fascinating new policy ideas. He
points out, for example, that corporations aren’t part of the free
market, but instead a gift offered by the government. (A very popular
one too, since companies voluntarily pay \$278B each year for it.) And
because of this, there’s absolutely no reason the government can’t tweak
its terms to make us all better off. For example, Baker points out that
currently, corporate rules count shareholders who don’t vote at all as
voting in favor of whatever the director’s of the corporation prefer.
Baker suggests requiring that all CEO pay packages get approved by a
majority of those actually voting, instead of letting major CEOs pick
how much to pay themselves as they do now.

Or what about copyright and patents? Again, this isn’t a law of nature,
but a big government gift. People who really care about shrinking
government would want to try to get rid of or shrink the laws that say
the government gets to make rules about what songs and movies we can
have on our personal computers.

Americans spend \$220 billion on prescription drugs, largely because of
government-granted patents. Instead of handing that money to big drug
companies, the government could spend far less (only a couple hundred
million) funding researchers itself and making the resulting drug
discoveries free to the public. College students spend \$12 billion.
Again, the government could make free textbooks for one-thousandth that.
And we spend \$37 billion on music and movies. Why not create an
“artistic freedom voucher” (vouchers — a conservative favorite!) that
can only be spent on artists who place their work in the public domain?

None of these would require outlawing the existing system — they could
work side-by-side, simply forcing the existing drug, textbook, and movie
companies to compete with this alternate idea. If their version works
better, then fine, they’ll get the money. But if not, there’ll be no
conservative nanny state to protect them.

Similarly, the government could expand the social security program,
allowing every to buy additional personal accounts from a system with
amazingly low overhead (.5% versus the 20% of private funds) and a
70-year track record of success. Or it could try to improve our
pitifully-bad health care system by letting people buy into the
government’s Medicare program, which again has amazingly low
administrative costs (did you know that, on a per person basis, we spend
80% of what Britain spends on health care altogether simply on
administration?) and serious bargaining power to push down prices.
Again, why not let the private companies try their best to compete?

The book itself also discusses bankruptcy laws, torts and takings, small
businesses, and taxes. And it goes in to far more detail on each of
these subjects. And it’s all available for free on the Internet, so
there’s no excuse for not reading it. It’s an fun read, the kind of book
that turns the way you think about the economy upside-down.

-   [Official website](http://www.conservativenannystate.org/)
-   [PDF version](http://www.conservativenannystate.org/cnswebbook.pdf)
-   [HTML version](http://www.conservativenannystate.org/cns.html)
-   [Paperback version](http://www.lulu.com/content/301875)


[image1_cns]: image1_cns.jpg

Introducing feeds.reddit
========================

May 24, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/feedit)

* * * * *

Over the past few weeks, I’ve been working on another new project. I
think it’s finally time to tell people about it and what better place to
start then here? So here’s the site:

[feeds.reddit.com](http://feeds.reddit.com/)

The idea is that it’s a more social web feed (RSS) reader. First, it’s
got a great interface for reading feeds over the Internet — it has key
commands ([see the faq](http://feeds.reddit.com/faq)) that let you
easily breeze through stories while keeping track of what you’ve read
and haven’t read. Then there’s a simple URL you can go to any time,
anywhere (I visit it from my phone) to see stories you haven’t read yet.

Second, just like on reddit, you can vote on items you like a lot. This
will go towards creating a list of the most popular items but it will
also train a recommendations system to try to find other items and other
feeds that you’ll probably like as well.

The problem is that building this stuff up requires users. So I hope
you’ll [try it out](http://feeds.reddit.com/). It’s got one-click import
from Bloglines and imports OPML files from any other feed reader, so
there’s no harm in trying it out.

[Let me know what you think.](http://feeds.reddit.com/feedback)


A Non-Programmer’s Apology
==========================

May 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nonapology)

* * * * *

In his classic *A Mathematicians Apology*, published 65 years ago, the
great mathematician G. H. Hardy wrote that “A man who sets out to
justify his existence and his activities” has only one real defense,
namely that “I do what I do because it is the one and only thing that I
can do at all well.” “I am not suggesting,” he added,

> that this is a defence which can be made by most people, since most
> people can do nothing at all well. But it is impregnable when it can
> be made without absurdity … If a man has any genuine talent he should
> be ready to make almost any sacrifice in order to cultivate it to the
> full.

Reading such comments one cannot help but apply them to oneself, and so
I did. Let us eschew humility for the sake of argument and suppose that
I am a great programmer. By Hardy’s suggestion, the responsible thing
for me to do would be to cultivate and use my talents in that field, to
spend my life being a great programmer. And that, I have to say, is a
prospect I look upon with no small amount of dread.

* * * * *

It was not always quite this way. For quite a while programming was
basically my life. And then, somehow, I drifted away. At first it was
small steps — discussing programming instead of doing it, then
discussing things *for* programmers, and then discussing other topics
altogether. By the time I reached the end of my first year in college,
when people were asking me to program for them over the summer, I hadn’t
programmed in so long that I wasn’t even sure I really could. I
certainly did not think of myself as a particularly good programmer.

Ironic, considering Hardy writes that

> Good work is not done by ‘humble’ men. It is one of the first duties
> of a professor, for example, in any subject, to exaggerate a little
> both the importance of his subject and his own importance in it. A man
> who is always asking ‘Is what I do worthwhile?’ and ‘Am I the right
> person to do it?’ will always be ineffective himself and a
> discouragement to others. He must shut his eyes a little and think a
> little more of his subject and himself than they deserve. This is not
> too difficult: it is harder not to make his subject and himself
> ridiculous by shutting his eyes too tightly.

Perhaps, after spending so much time not programming, the blinders had
worn off. Or perhaps it was the reverse: that I had to convince myself
that I was good at what I was doing now, and, since that thing was not
programming, by extension, that I was not very good at programming.

Whatever the reason, I looked upon the task of actually having to
program for three months with uncertainty and trepidation. For days, if
I recall correctly, I dithered. Thinking myself incapable of serious
programming, I thought to wait until my partner arrived and instead
spend my time assisting him. But days passed and I realized it would be
weeks before he would appear, and I finally decided to try to program
something in the meantime.

To my shock, it went amazingly well and I have since become convinced
that I’m a pretty good programmer, if lacking in most other areas. But
now I find myself faced with this dilemma: it is those other areas I
would much prefer to work in.

* * * * *

The summer before college [I learned
something](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/epiphany) that struck me as
incredibly important and yet known by very few. It seemed clear to me
that the only responsible way to live my life would be to do something
that would only be done by someone who knew this thing — after all,
there were few who did and many who didn’t, so it seemed logical to
leave most other tasks to the majority.

I concluded that the best thing to do would be to attempt to explain
this thing I’d learned to others. Any specific task I could do with the
knowledge would be far outweighed by the tasks done by those I’d
explained the knowledge to.^[1](#fn:1)^ It was only after I’d decided on
this course of action (and perhaps this is the blinders once again) that
it struck me that explaining complicated ideas was actually something
I’d always loved doing and was really pretty good at.

That aside, having spent the morning reading David Foster
Wallace^[2](#fn:2)^, it is plain that I am no great writer. And so,
reading Hardy, I am left wondering whether my decision is somehow
irresponsible.

I am saved, I think, because it appears that Hardy’s logic to some
extent parallels mine. Why is it important for the man who “can bat
unusually well” to become “a professional cricketer”? It is, presumably,
because those who can bat unusually well are in short supply and so the
few who are gifted with that talent should do us all the favor of making
use of it. If those whose “judgment of the markets is quick and sound”
become cricketers, while the good batters become stockbrokers, we will
end up with mediocre cricketers and mediocre stockbrokers. Better for
all of us if the reverse is the case.

But this, of course, is awfully similar to the logic I myself employed.
It is important for me to spend my life explaining what I’d learned
because people who had learned it are in short supply — much shorter
supply, in fact (or so it appears), than people who can bat well.

* * * * *

However, there is also an assumption hidden in that statement. It only
makes sense to decide what to become based on what you can presently do
if you believe that abilities are somehow granted innately and can
merely be cultivated, not created in themselves. This is a fairly common
view, although rarely consciously articulated (as indeed Hardy takes it
for granted), but not one that I subscribe to.

Instead, it seems plausible that talent is made through practice, that
those who are good batters are that way after spending enormous
quantities of time batting as a kid.^[3](#fn:3)^ Mozart, for example,
was the son of “one of Europe’s leading musical teachers”^[4](#fn:4)^
and said teacher began music instruction at age three. While I am
plainly no Mozart, several similarities do seem apparent. My father had
a computer programming company and he began showing me how to use the
computer as far back as I can remember.

The extreme conclusion from the theory that there is no innate talent is
that there is no difference between people and thus, as much as
possible, we should get people to do the most important tasks (writing,
as opposed to cricket, let’s say). But in fact this does not follow.

Learning is like compound interest. A little bit of knowledge makes it
easier to pick up more. Knowing what addition is and how to do it, you
can then read a wide variety of things that use addition, thus knowing
even more and being able to use that knowledge in a similar
manner.^[5](#fn:5)^ And so, the growth in knowledge
accelerates.^[6](#fn:6)^ This is why children who get started on
something at a young age, as Mozart did, grow up to have such an
advantage.

And even if (highly implausibly) we were able to control the
circumstances in which all children grew up so as to maximize their
ability to perform the most important tasks, that still would not be
enough, since in addition to aptitude there is also interest.

Imagine the three sons of a famous football player. All three are raised
similarly, with athletic activity from their earliest days, and thus
have an equal aptitude for playing football. Two of them pick up this
task excitedly, while one, despite being good at it, is
uninterested^[7](#fn:7)^ and prefers to read books.^[8](#fn:8)^ It would
not only be unfair to force him to use his aptitude and play football,
it would also be unwise. Someone whose heart isn’t in it is unlikely to
spend the time necessary to excel.

* * * * *

And this, in short^[9](#fn:9)^, is the position I find myself in. I
don’t *want* to be a programmer. When I look at programming books, I am
more tempted to mock them than to read them. When I go to programmer
conferences, I’d rather skip out and talk politics than programming. And
writing code, although it can be enjoyable, is hardly something I want
to spend my life doing.

Perhaps, I fear, this decision deprives society of one great programmer
in favor of one mediocre writer. And let’s not hide behind the cloak of
uncertainty, let’s say we know that it does. Even so, I would make it.
The writing is too important, the programming too unenjoyable.

And for that, I apologize.

### Notes

* * * * *

1.  Explaining what that knowledge is, naturally, a larger project and
    must wait for another time. [↩](#fnref:1)

2.  You can probably see DFW’s influence on this piece, not least of
    which in these footnotes. [↩](#fnref:2)

3.  Indeed, this apparently parallels the views of the psychologists who
    have studied the question. Anders Ericsson, a psychology professor
    who studies “expert performance”, told the *New York Times Magazine*
    that “the most general claim” in his work “is that a lot of people
    believe there are some inherent limits they were born with. But
    there is surprisingly little hard evidence … .” The conclusion that
    follows, the *NYTM* notes, is that “when it comes to choosing a life
    path, you should do what you love — because if you don’t love it,
    you are unlikely to work hard enough to get very good. Most people
    naturally don’t like to do things they aren’t ‘good’ at. So they
    often give up, telling themselves they simply don’t possess the
    talent for math or skiing or the violin. But what they really lack
    is the desire to be good and to undertake the deliberate practice
    that would make them
    better.”[†](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/07/magazine/07wwln_freak.html?ex=1148875200&en=611751da74b96d1b&ei=5070) [↩](#fnref:3)

4.  The quote is [from
    Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfgang_Amadeus_Mozart)
    where, indeed, the other facts are drawn from as well, the idea
    having been suggested by Stephen Jay Gould’s essay “Mozart and
    Modularity”, collected in his book *Eight Little
    Piggies*. [↩](#fnref:4)

5.  I’ve always thought that this was the reason kids (or maybe just me)
    especially disliked history. Every other field — biology, math, art
    — had at least some connection to the present and thus kids had some
    foundational knowledge to build on. But history? We simply weren’t
    there and thus know absolutely nothing of it. [↩](#fnref:5)

6.  It was tempting to write that “the rate of growth” accelerates, but
    that would mean something rather different. [↩](#fnref:6)

7.  Many people, of course, are uninterested in such things precisely
    because they aren’t very good at them. There’s nothing like repeated
    failures to turn you way from an activity. Perhaps this is another
    reason to start young — young children might be less stung by
    failure, as little is expected from them. [↩](#fnref:7)

8.  I apologize for the clichédness of this example. [↩](#fnref:8)

9.  Well, shorter than most DFW. [↩](#fnref:9)




Gmail Down
==========

May 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gmaildown)

* * * * *

My Gmail account has been down for over two days. When I try to log in,
it says it’s down for maintenance and they don’t know how long it will
take. When I try to get my mail through POP, it simply doesn’t work. And
when I contact the Gmail people, all I get back is form responses. I’ve
used Gmail as my mail client for the past couple years, so if you’ve
sent me mail and I haven’t responded — that’s why.

The thing that really puzzles me is *why*. I can understand occasional
outtages, but I can’t understand what could cause my account to go down
for days, unless they lost my data and are too embarassed to actually
tell me. The only thing I can think of is that something went wrong and
there’s just no one around to fix it. Which, considering Gmail’s
popularity, would be kinda sad.

Sorry to bug you with my personal problems, but obviously it’s time for
me to switch away from Gmail. I’ve been careful to always keep my email
going to my main server, so I haven’t lost too much data, but figuring
out a way to read my mail again is rather difficult.

I get absurd quanities of spam (40,000 spam messages a month) so my
mailboxes are just full of junk. And it’s not clear to me how to clear
it out. A bayesian filter like bogofilter requires non-spam messages to
train on — and if I had my non-spam messages, I wouldn’t need a spam
filter. Spamassassin seems to work better, but it’s incredibly slow and
inaccurate, taking a couple seconds per email (at this rate it will take
days to see my mail again).

If you have any suggestions (or you’re a person at Google who can turn
my account on again) feel free to help. If you want to email me, I’m
checking “feeds@reddit.com”.


Legacy
======

June 1, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/legacy)

* * * * *

Ambitious people want to leave legacies, but what sort of legacies do
they want to leave? The traditional criterion is that your importance is
measured by the effect of what you do. Thus the most important lawyers
are the Supreme Court justices, since their decisions affect the entire
nation. And the greatest mathematicians are those that make important
discoveries, since their discoveries end up being used by many who
follow.

This seems quite reasonable. One’s legacy depends on one’s impact and
what better way to measure impact than by the effect of what you’ve
done. But this is measuring against the wrong baseline. The real
question is not what effect your work had, but what things would be like
had you never done it.

The two are not at all the same. It is rather commonly accepted that
there are “ideas whose time has come” and history tends to bear this
out. When Newton invented the calculus, so did Leibniz. When Darwin
discovered evolution through natural selection, so did Alfred Russel
Wallace. When Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone, so did
Elisha Gray (before him, arguably).

In these cases the facts are plain: had Newton, Darwin, and Bell never
done their work, the result would have been largely the same — we’d
still have calculus, evolution, and the telephone. And yet such people
are hailed as major heroes, their legacies immortalized.

Perhaps, if one only cares about such things, this is enough. (Although
this seems a rather dangerous game, since the future could wake up at
any moment and realize its adulation is misplaced.) But if one genuinely
cares about their impact, instead of simply how their impact is
perceived, more careful thought is in order.

I once spent time with a well-known academic, who had published several
works widely recognized as classics even outside his field, and he
offered some career advice in the sciences. (Actually, come to think of
it, there are two people of whom this is true, suggesting the phenomenon
has broader significance.) Such-and-such a field is very hot right now,
he said, you could really make a name for yourself by getting into it.
The idea being that major discoveries were sure to follow soon and that
if I picked that field I could be the one to make them.

By my test, such a thing would leave a poor legacy. (For what it’s
worth, I don’t think either person’s works fall into this category; that
is to say, their reputation is still deserved even by these standards.)
Even worse, you’d know it. Presumably Darwin and Newton didn’t begin
their investigations because they thought the field was “hot”. They
thought through doing it they would have a significant impact, even
though that turned out to be wrong. But someone who joined a field
simply because they thought a major discovery would come from it soon
could never enjoy such a delusion. Instead, they would know that their
work would make little difference, and would have to labor under such
impressions.

The same is true of other professions we misconceive of as being
important. Take being a Supreme Court justice, for example.
Traditionally, this is thought of as a majestic job in which one gets to
make decisions of great import. In fact, it seems to me that one has
little impact at all. Most of your impact was made by the politics of
the President who appointed you. Had you not been around for the job, he
would have found someone else who would take similar positions. The only
way one could have a real impact as Supreme Court justice would be to
change your politics once appointed to the bench and the only way you
could prepare for such a thing would be to spend the majority of your
career doing things you thought were wrong in the hopes that one day you
might get picked for the Supreme Court. That seems a rather hard lot to
swallow.

So what jobs do leave a real legacy? It’s hard to think of most of them,
since by their very nature they require doing things that other people
*aren’t* trying to do, and thus include the things that people haven’t
thought of. But one good source of them is trying to do things that
change the system instead of following it. For example, the university
system encourages people to become professors who do research in certain
areas (and thus many people do this); it discourages people from trying
to change the nature of the university itself.

Naturally, doing things like changing the university are much harder
than simply becoming yet another professor. But for those who genuinely
care about their legacies, it doesn’t seem like there’s much choice.


An Inconvenient Truth
=====================

June 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/inconvenient)

* * * * *

Al Gore’s presentation on global warming is filled with graphs — Gore is
fanatical about collecting evidence, even at one point going to the
North Pole to persuade the scientists there to release their records of
the ice shelves — but only one of them really matters. It comes early in
the film, as Gore talks about the large ice core samples that scientists
take to trace the history of the Earth’s temperature and CO2 ratings.

Gore shows the results of these samples and then says we can go back
further. The screen expands in both directions to show a massive graph
of CO2 concentration going back 600,000 years. Its had its fluctuations
over that time — large hills and then valleys. Underneath it, he then
graphs temperature over the same period.

Temperature tracks CO2 almost exactly, with a several-decade lag. Those
large fluctuations? Those were the six ice ages we’ve had over the past
600,000 years. CO2 in the atmosphere goes up and so does the
temperature, the CO2 trapping the sun’s radiation inside our planet,
where it heats the Earth.

These huge fluctuations are the difference between ice ages and where we
are today. Then Gore shows the most recent trajectory of CO2: straight
up, more than doubled. “If that much CO2 in one direction causes an ice
age,” Gore says, “imagine what it will do in the other direction.” And
then he shows the projections for the next 50 years. Again straight up,
another doubling. “This is literally off he charts,” he explains. He has
to climb up to reach that peak.

“Not a single number in this graph,” he says, “is in dispute.” This is
the inconvenient truth: unless we change, we will destroy the
environment that sustains our species.

-   [Official movie website](http://www.climatecrisis.net/)



Shifting the Terms of Debate: How Big Business Covered Up Global Warming
========================================================================

June 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1)

* * * * *

*[Here’s the first part of an article I wrote last year about how
right-wing think tanks shift the debate.]*

In 2004, Michelle Malkin, a conservative editorialist, published the
book *In Defense of Internment*. It argued that declassified security
intercepts showed that Japanese internment during World War II — the
government policy that relocated thousands of Japanese to concentration
camps — was actually justified in the name of national security. We
needed to learn the truth, Malkin insisted, so that we could see how
racial profiling was similarly justified to fight the “war on terror.”

Bainbridge Island was the center of the evacuations; to this day,
residents still feel ashamed and teach students a special unit about the
incident, entitled “Leaving Our Island”. But one parent in the district,
Mary Dombrowski, was persuaded by Malkin’s book that the evacuation was
actually justified and insisted the school was teaching a one-sided
version of the internment story, “propaganda” that forced impressionable
children into thinking that the concentration camps were a mistake.

The school’s principal defended the practice. As the *Seattle Times*
reported:

> “We do teach it as a mistake,” she said, noting that the U.S.
> government has admitted it was wrong. “As an educator, there are some
> things that we can say aren’t debatable anymore.” Slavery, for
> example. Or the internment — as opposed to a subject such as global
> warming, she
> said.[†](http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2002027639_bainbridge06m.html)

True, Japanese internment isn’t a controversial issue like global
warming, but ten years ago, global warming wasn’t a controversial issue
either. In 1995, the UN’s panel on international climate change released
its consensus report, finding that global warming was a real and serious
issue that had to be quickly confronted. The media covered the
scientists’ research and the population agreed, leading President
Clinton to say he would sign an international treaty to stop global
warming.

Then came the backlash. The Global Climate Coalition (funded by over 40
major corporate groups like Amoco, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and
General Motors) began spending millions of dollars each year to derail
the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty to help reduce global
warming. They held conferences entitled “The Costs of Kyoto,” issued
press releases and faxes dismissing the scientific evidence for global
warming, and spent more than \$3 million on newspaper and television ads
claiming Kyoto would mean a “50-cent-per-gallon gasoline
tax.”[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html)

The media, in response to flurries of “blast faxes” (a technique in
which a press release is simultaneously faxed to thousands of
journalists) and accusations of left-wing bias, began backing off from
the scientific
evidence.[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html) A
recent study found only 35% of newspaper stories on global warming
accurately described the scientific consensus, with the majority
implying that scientists who believed in global warming were just as
common as global warming deniers (of which there were only a tiny
handful, almost all of whom had received funding from energy companies
or associated groups).[†](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=1978)

It all had an incredible effect on the public. In 1993, 88% of Americans
thought global warming was a serious problem. By 1997, that number had
fallen to 42%, with only 28% saying immediate action was necessary.
^[1](#fn:1)^ And so Clinton changed course and insisted that cutting
emissions should be put off for 20 years.

US businesses seriously weakened the Kyoto Protocol, leading it to
require only a 7% reduction in emissions (compared to the 20% requested
by European nations) and then President Bush refused to sign on to even
that.[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html) In four
short years, big business had managed to turn nearly half the country
around and halt the efforts to protect the planet.

And now, the principal on Bainbridge Island, like most people, thinks
global warming is a hotly contested issue — the paradigmatic example of
a hotly contested issue — even when the science is clear. (“There’s no
better scientific consensus on this on any issue I know,” said the head
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “except maybe
Newton’s second law of dynamics.”)^[2](#fn:2)^ But all this debate about
problems has kept us away from talk about solutions. As journalist Ross
Gelbspan puts it, “By keeping the discussion focused on whether there is
a problem in the first place, they have effectively silenced the debate
over what to do about it.”[†](http://dieoff.org/page82.htm) So is it any
wonder that conservatives want to do the same thing again? And again?
And again?

*Next:* [Part 2: Making Noise](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2)

CNN, *USA Today* poll (conducted by Gallup). “We’d like your impression
of what scientists believe…?”, November 1997. In *Roper Center for
Public Opinion Research* (0287624, 072). USGALLUP.97NV06, R31.

NBC News, *Wall Street Journal* poll (conducted by Hart and Teeter).
“From what you know about global climate change…?”, October 1997. In
*Roper Center for Public Opinion Research* (0291162, 077).
USNBCWSJ.97OC25, R30B.

* * * * *

1.  Cambridge Reports, Research International poll. “Do you feel that
    global warming is a very serious problem…?”, *Cambridge Reports
    National Omnibus Survey*, September 1993, in *Roper Center for
    Public Opinion Research* (0290350, 039). USCAMREP.93SEP,
    R40. [↩](#fnref:1)

2.  Warrick, Joby. “Consensus Emerges Earth Is Warming — Now What?”,
    *Washington Post*, 12 Nov. 1997: A01. [↩](#fnref:2)




Making Noise: How Right-Wing Think Tanks Get the Word Out
=========================================================

June 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2)

* * * * *

*[This is part 2 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1).]*

Malkin’s book on internment was no more accurate than the corporate
misinformation about global warming. Historians quickly showed the book
badly distorted the government records and secret cables it purported to
describe. As just one example, Malkin writes that a Japanese message
stated they “had [Japanese] spies in the U.S. Army” when it actually
said they hoped to recruit spies in the
army.[†](http://hnn.us/articles/7092.html) But it should be no big
surprise that Malkin, who is, after all, an editorialist and not a
historian, didn’t manage to fully understand the complex documentary
record in the year she spent writing the book
part-time.[†](http://www.isthatlegal.org/Muller_and_Robinson_on_Malkin.html)

Malkin’s motives, as a right-wing activist and proponent of racial
profiling, are fairly obvious. But how did Mary Dombrowski, the
Bainbridge Island parent, get caught up in this latest attempt to
rewrite history? Opinions on global warming were changed because big
business could afford to spent millions to change people’s minds. But
racial profiling seems like less of a moneymaker. Who invested in
spreading that message?

The first step is getting the information out there. Dombrowski probably
heard about Malkin’s book from the Fox News Channel, where it was
ceaselessly promoted for days, and where Malkin is a contributor. Or
maybe she heard about it on MSNBC’s *Scarborough Country*, a show hosted
by a former Republican congressman, which had Malkin as a guest. Or
maybe she heard it while driving and listening to FOX host Sean
Hannity’s radio show, or maybe Rush Limbaugh’s. Or maybe she read a
review in the *New York Post* (which, like Fox News, is owned by Rupert
Murdoch). Or maybe she read about it on a right-wing website or weblog,
like Townhall.com, which publishes 10 new conservative op-ed columns
every day.

All of these organizations are partisan conservative outlets.
Townhall.com, for example, is published by the Heritage Foundation, a
right-wing Washington, D.C. think tank. Most people imagine a think tank
as a place where smart people think big thoughts, coming up with new
ideas for the government to use. But that’s not how Heritage works.
Nearly half of Heritage’s \$30 million budget is spent on publicity, not
research.[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/9607/heritage.html) Every day,
they take work like Malkin’s that agrees with their ideological
prejudices and push it out through the right-wing media described above
(Fox News, Rush Limbaugh, *New York Post*) and into the mainstream media
(ABC, NPR, *New York Times*, *Seattle Times*).

They use a variety of tactics. Heritage, for example, publishes an
annual telephone directory featuring thousands of conservative experts
and associated policy organizations. (*The Right Nation*, 161) And if
looking up somebody is too much work, Heritage maintains a 24-hour
hotline for the media, providing quotes promoting conservative ideology
on any subject. Heritage’s “information marketing” department makes
packages of colored index cards with pre-printed talking points for any
conservative who plans to do an interview. (*The Right Nation*, 167) And
Heritage computers are stocked with the names of over 3,500 journalists,
organized by specialty, who Heritage staffers personally call to make
sure they have all the latest conservative misinformation. Every
Heritage study is turned into a two-page summary which is then turned
into an op-ed piece which is then distributed to newspapers through the
Heritage Features Syndicate. (*What Liberal Media?*, 83)

It all adds up: a 2003 study by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, the
media watch group, found conservative think tanks were cited nearly
14,000 times in major newspapers, television, and radio shows. (By
comparison, liberal think tanks were cited only 4,000 times that
year.)[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/0405/think-tank.html) That means
10,000 additional quotes of right-wing ideology, misleading statistics,
distorted facts, and so on. There’s no way that doesn’t unfairly skew
the public debate.

*Next:* [Part 3: Endorsing Racism](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3)


Endorsing Racism: The Story of The Bell Curve
=============================================

June 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3)

* * * * *

*[This is part 3 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1) and [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2).]*

If you have any doubt about the power of the think tanks, look no
further than the story of *The Bell Curve*. Written by Charles Murray,
who received over 1.2 million from right-wing foundations for his work,
the book claimed that IQ tests revealed black people to be genetically
less intelligent than whites, thus explaining their low place in
society. Murray published the 845-page book without showing it to any
other scientists, leading the *Wall Street Journal* to say he pursued “a
strategy that provided book galleys to likely supporters while
withholding them from likely critics” in an attempt “to fix the fight …
contrary to usual publishing protocol.” Murray’s think tank, the
American Enterprise Institute, flew key members of the media to
Washington for a weekend of briefings on the book’s content. (*What
Liberal Media?*, 94)

And the media lapped it up. In what Eric Alterman has termed “a kind of
Rorschach test for pundits,” (*WLM?*, 96) every major media outlet
reviewed the book without questioning the accuracy of its contents.
Instead, they merely quibbled about its proposed recommendations that
the dumb blacks, with their dangerously high reproductive rates, might
have to be kept in “a high-tech and more lavish version of an Indian
reservation” without such luxuries as “individualism, equal rights
before the law,” and so on. Reviewers proposed more moderate solutions,
like just taking away their welfare checks. (*WLM?*, 94)

But such quibbles aside, the amount of coverage alone was incredible.
The book received cover stories in *Newsweek* (“the science behind [it]
is overwhelmingly mainstream”), *The New Republic* (which dedicated an
entire issue to discussion of the book), and *The New York Times Book
Review* (which suggested critics disliked its “appeal to sweet reason”
and are “inclined to hang the defendants without a trial”). Detailed
articles appeared in *TIME*, *The New York Times* (“makes a strong
case”), *The New York Times Magazine*, *Forbes* (praising the book’s
“Jeffersonian vision”), the *Wall Street Journal*, and the *National
Review*. It received a respectful airing on such shows as ABC’s
*Nightline*, PBS’s *MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour*, the *McLaughlin Group*,
*Think Tank* (which dedicated a special two-part series to the book),
ABC’s *PrimeTime Live*, and NPR’s *All Things Considered*. With fifteen
weeks on the bestseller list, it ended up selling over 300,000 copies in
hardcover.[†](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=1271)

This wasn’t just a media debate about the existence of global warming or
the merits of internment, this was a full-on media endorsement of
racism, which the *American Heritage Dictionary* defines as “The belief
that race accounts for differences in human character or ability and
that a particular race is superior to others.” Nor did the media mention
the work’s political intentions. On the contrary, they presented it as
the sober work of social scientists: *Nightline*’s Ted Koppel lamented
to Murray about how his “great deal of work and research” had become “a
political football”.[†](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=1271)

Of course, this was almost certainly Murray’s intention all along. In
the book proposal for his previous book (*Losing Ground*, an attack on
government welfare programs) he had explained: “Why can a publisher sell
this book? Because a huge number of well-meaning whites fear that they
are closet racists, and this book tells them they are not. It’s going to
make them feel better about things they already think but do not know
how to say.”[†](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=1271) That’s
certainly what *The Bell Curve* did, replacing a debate over how to
improve black achievement with one about whether such improvement was
even possible.

There was just one problem: none of this stuff was accurate. As
Professor Michael Nunley wrote in a special issue of the *American
Behavioral Scientist* on *The Bell Curve*, after a series of scientific
articles debunked all the book’s major claims: “I believe this book is a
fraud, that its authors must have known it was a fraud when they were
writing it, and that Charles Murray must still know it’s a fraud as he
goes around defending it. … After careful reading, I cannot believe its
authors were not acutely aware of … how they were distorting the
material they did include.” (*WLM?*, 100)

*Next:* [Part 4: Spreading Lies](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4)


Spreading Lies: How Think Tanks Ignore the Facts
================================================

June 9, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4)

* * * * *

*[This is part 4 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), and [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3).]*

But do the right-wing think tanks even care about the facts? In his
autobiography, *Blinded by the Right*, David Brock describes his
experience being recruited for one right out of college: “Though I had
no advanced degrees, I assumed the grandiose title of John M. Olin
Fellow in Congressional Studies, which, if nothing else, certainly
impressed my parents. … My assignment was to write a monograph, which I
hoped to publish as a book, challenging the conservative orthodoxy on
the proper relationship between the executive and legislative branches
of government.” This topic was chosen, Brock explains, because with “a
squish like Bush in the White House … the political reality [was] that
the conservative agenda could be best advanced by renegade conservatives
on Capitol Hill.” (79f)

Needless to say, paying fresh-faced former college students lots of
money to write articles that serve political needs is not the best way
to get accurate information. But is accurate information the goal? Look
at John Lott, a “resident scholar” at the American Enterprise Institute
— the same right-wing think tank that promoted *The Bell Curve*. Lott’s
book *More Guns, Less Crime* claimed that his scientific studies had
found that passing laws to allow people to carry concealed weapons
actually lowered crime rates. As usual, the evidence melted away upon
investigation, but Lott’s errors were more serious than most.

Not content to simply distort the data, Lott fabricated an entire study
which he claimed showed that in 97% of cases, simply brandishing a gun
would cause an attacker to flee. When Internet critics begun to point
out his inconsistencies on this claim, Lott posted responses under the
name “Mary Rosh” to defend himself. “I have to say that he was the best
professor I ever had,” Lott gushed about himself one Internet posting.
“There were a group of us students who would try to take any class that
he taught. Lott finally had to tell us that it was best for us to try
and take classes from other professors.”

Confronted about his alternate identity, Lott told the *Washington Post*
“I probably shouldn’t have done it — I know I shouldn’t have done it”.
And yet, the very next day he again attacked his critics, this time
under the new pseudonym “Washingtonian”. (It later got so bad that one
of Lott’s pseudonyms would start talking about posts from another Lott
pseudonym.)[†](http://timlambert.org/guns/Lott/)

Lott, of course, is not the only scholar to make things up to bolster
his case. For comparison, look at Michael Bellesiles, author of the
anti-gun book *Arming America*, which argued guns were uncommon in early
America. Other scholars investigated and found that Bellesiles had
probably fabricated evidence. Emory University, where Bellesiles was a
professor of history, begun an investigation into the accuracy of his
work, eventually forcing him to resign. His publisher, Knopf, pulled the
book out of print. Libraries pulled the book off their shelves. Columbia
University revoked the Bancroft Prize the book had been awarded. The
scandal was widely covered in academic circles. Bellesiles was firmly
disgraced and has not shown his face in public since.

And what happened to Lott? Nothing. Lott remains a “resident scholar” at
the American Enterprise Institute, his book continues to sell well, his
op-ed pieces are still published in major papers, and he gives talks
around the country.[†](http://timlambert.org/guns/Lott/) For the
right-wing scholar, even outright fraud is no serious obstacle.

*Next:* [Part 5: Saving Business](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5)


Saving Business: The Origins of Right-Wing Think Tanks
======================================================

June 10, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5)

* * * * *

*[This is part 5 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), and [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4).]*

Since the goal of these think tanks clearly isn’t to advance knowledge,
what are they for? To understand their real goals, we have to look at
why they were created. After the tumultuous 1960s led a generation of
students to start questioning authority, business decided something had
to be done. “The American economic system,” explained Lewis Powell in a
1971 memo for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “is under broad attack” from
“perfectly respectable elements of society: from the college campus, the
pulpit, the media, the intellectual and literary journals, the arts and
sciences, and from politicians.”

And business has no one to blame but itself for not getting these things
under control: the colleges are funded by “contributions from capital
funds controlled or generated by American business. The boards of
trustees … overwhelmingly are composed of men and women who are leaders
in the system.” And the media “are owned and theoretically controlled by
corporations which depend upon profits, and the enterprise system to
survive.” So business must “conduct guerilla warfare” by “establishing a
staff of highly qualified scholars” who can be paid to publish a “steady
flow of scholarly articles” in magazines and journals as well as books
and pamphlets to be published “at airports, drugstores, and
elsewhere.”[†](http://reclaimdemocracy.org/corporate_accountability/powell_memo_lewis.html)

William Simon, president of the right-wing Olin Foundation (the same one
that later funded Brock) was more blunt: “The only thing that can save
the Republican Party … is a counter-intelligentsia. … [Conservative
scholars] must be given grants, grants, and more grants in exchange for
books, books, and more books.” (*Blinded By the Right*, 78)

The Powell memo was incredibly influential. Soon after it was written,
business began following its advice, building up its network of think
tanks, news outlets, and media pressure groups. These organizations
begun to dot the landscape, hiding behind respectable names like the
Manhattan Institute or the Heartland Foundation. While these
institutions were all funded by partisan conservatives, news accounts
rarely noted this fact. (Another FAIR study finds The Heritage
Foundation’s political orientation — let alone its funding — was only
identified in 24% of news
citations.)[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/9805/think-tanks.html)

As the conservative message machine grew stronger, political debate and
electoral results begun to shift further and further to the right,
eventually allowing extreme conservatives to be elected, first with
Ronald Reagan and now with George W. Bush. More recently, conservatives
have managed to finally win not only the White House but both houses of
Congress. While their policy proposals, when understood, are just as
unpopular as ever, conservatives are able to use their media power to
twist the debate.

*Next:* [Part 6: Hurting Seniors](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6)


Hurting Seniors: The Attack on Social Security
==============================================

June 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6)

* * * * *

*[This is part 6 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4), and [part
five](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5).]*

Recent events provide a compelling case study of how this process works.
Conservatives have wanted to get rid of Social Security for years. The
most successful anti-poverty program in history, it clearly shows how
the government can be used to help people — anathema to conservative
ideology. Now, with a secure lock on government, is their time to
strike. As a White House deputy wrote in a memo that was later leaked,
“For the first time in six decades, the Social Security battle is one we
can win — and in doing so, we can help transform the political and
philosophical landscape of the
country.”[†](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/movable_type/2005-3_archives/000119.html)

There’s extremely strong public support for Social Security —
conservatives could certainly never just come out and say they wanted to
end it — so their plan is to deceive the public: First, persuade people
that Social Security is facing some sort of crisis and won’t be around
for the next generation. Second, convince them to begin replacing Social
Security with a privatized version. Privatization, the logic goes, will
naturally keep increasing until all of Social Security is eliminated.
The only problem is that Social Security isn’t facing a crisis and any
form of privatization, which would require both paying out to existing
retirees and saving away money for the private accounts of the current
generation, would worsen whatever financial problems Social Security
does have.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-cnn-social-security.html)

But think tanks have been preparing for this moment for years, floating
privatization plans and doing their best to persuade the media that
Social Security was in imminent danger. So when the Bush administration
started up their anti-Social Security campaign, the media knew exactly
what to say.

CBS, for example, presented a segment featuring man-on-the-street Tad
DeHaven. “I don’t expect to get anything from Social Security, OK?” said
young DeHaven. “It’s not going to be there—that’s my assumption.”
DeHaven had good reason to say these things: for years, he’s been one of
the leading Republican activists in the fight to get rid of Social
Security. CBS never mentioned the
connection.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-cnn-social-security.html)

A later CBS report boosted fears that Social Security was going bankrupt
by displaying a graphic on the screen that read “2042: Insolvent = 0
benefits??” [*sic*] (“In 2042, Social Security will become insolvent,
and today’s young workers risk losing their benefits,” a voiceover
explained.) But this just isn’t true: even the pessimistic Social
Security Administration concedes that by 2042 Social Security will be
able to pay nearly 80% of scheduled benefits, which is still far more
than what it pays out
today.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-social-security-update.html)

Other networks were no better. NBC’s report feature quotes from Bush
saying the system would go “flat bust” and an interview with a Heritage
Foundation scholar — identified only as a “social security expert” — but
allowed no critics to contradict their
claims.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/nbc-socialsecurity.html)
Meanwhile, an ABC report claimed “One thing everyone agrees on, the
Social Security system as it exists now won’t be able to afford those
payments for long after the Wilsons retire.” In fact, it’s quite the
opposite: even the most pessimistic predictions say that Social Security
will be fine until the Wilsons are statistically dead. Again, no critics
got got a
voice.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/abc-socialsecurity.html)

*Next:* Part 7: [Fighting Back](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting7)


Fighting Back: Responses to the Mainstream Media
================================================

June 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting7)

* * * * *

*[This is part 7 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4), [part
five](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5), and [part
six](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6).]*

Unlike the conservative media, it does not appear the national media is
intentionally partisan. But it exists in a very specific structural
context. A recent study found that two-thirds of journalists thought
bottom-line pressure was “seriously hurting the quality of news
coverage” while around half reported their newsrooms had been cut. 75%
of print and 85% of broadcast journalists agreed that “too little
attention is paid to complex
issues.”[†](http://people-press.org/reports/pdf/214topline.pdf) When
you’re short on staff and stories are shallow, reporters become even
more dependent on outside sources — and the right-wing think tanks are
more than willing to help out, while further pulling coverage to the
right.

But one obvious solution — creating a matching set of left-wing think
tanks — while perhaps helpful in balancing the debate, will not solve
the problem. Media norms of balance mean that even qualified experts
will always be presented as “just one side of the story,” balanced
directly against inaccurate conservatives — recall how the handful of
corporate-funded global warming deniers are still balanced against the
overwhelming scientific consensus.

Ideally, viewers would be able to hear both perspectives and decide
which they thought was accurate. But since, as the journalists conceded,
so little time is spent explaining complex issues, in practice very
little information is presented that can help the viewer decide who’s
correct. So they’re left to decide based on their existing ideological
preferences, further splitting the country into two alternate realities.

Figuring out what is true — especially when it’s so obvious, as in the
examples above — is precisely what the mainstream media should be doing.
Partisan pundits would be replaced with thoughtful scholars.
Non-peer-reviewed books would be ignored, not endlessly promoted.
Scientific facts would be given precedence over political arguments.
Political commentary would be replaced by factual education.

Don’t hold your breath. Six major companies own nearly 90% of all media
outlets.[†](http://www.thevoicenews.com/news/2003/0411/Front_Page/C06_LaVoie-media.html)
And they — and their advertisers — don’t mind how things are going.
Sumner Redstone, CEO of Viacom (Paramount, CBS, Blockbuster, MTV, Comedy
Central, etc.), told a group of CEOs that “I look at the election from
what’s good for Viacom. I vote for what’s good for Viacom.” And, “from a
Viacom standpoint, the election of a Republican administration is a
better deal. Because the Republican administration has stood for many
things we believe in, deregulation and so
on.”[†](http://www.opinionjournal.com/extra/?id=110005669) Better news
reporting wouldn’t just be more expensive, it would threaten these
business interests.

To get the straight story, it’s necessary to turn to independent and
community sources which don’t have such conflicts of interest. One
possibility is the daily news show *Democracy Now!*, hosted by Amy
Goodman, which is funded only by viewers and foundations. Broadcast on
150 radio stations, 150 television stations, and the Internet, the show
presents stories from activists, journalists, authors, and public
interest organizations from around the world.

When outlets from ABC to the *New York Times* began claiming Iraq had
weapons of mass destruction, *Democracy Now!* was one of the few sources
to take a contrary view. It presented the testimony of Iraq’s top
weapons official, who defected to the US and explained that all the
weapons had been destroyed. (Other stations, ironically, parroted the
Bush administration in promoting the information he presented about the
weapons Iraq *had*, without mentioning they had been
destroyed.)[†](http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=03/04/07/0320205)

And when US soldiers kidnapped Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the
democratically-elected president of Haiti, and flew him to the Central
African Republic where they locked him in a hotel room, he managed to
quietly phone out while armed guards stood outside his door. *Democracy
Now!* was alone in airing his incredible story. When Aristide was
finally freed, he insisted on returning to his country and again Amy
Goodman was the only US television journalist who dared to accompany him
back.[†](http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=04/03/01/1521216&mode=thread&tid=25)

Still, *Democracy Now!*’s audience is rather small compared to that of
the mainstream media. But stories from overseas hint at what could
happen if enough people begun paying attention to such sources. In South
Korea, the country with the highest rate of broadband adoption, politics
has been turned upside down by OhmyNews, a five-year-old website.
Founded by Oh Yeon Ho, OhymyNews has a feature unlike any other paper:
more than 85% of its stories are contributed by
readers.[†](http://www.siliconvalley.com/mld/siliconvalley/business/columnists/5889390.htm)

Almost anyone can write for OhmyNews: the site posts 70% of all stories
that are submitted, over 15,000 citizen-reporters have published
stories. OhmyNews copyedits their work but tries to leave their
differing styles intact. The citizen-reporters write about things they
know about and that interest them, together they end up covering most of
the traditional spectrum. Yet their new voices end up providing coverage
on things which typically get ignored by the mainstream
media.[†](http://english.ohmynews.com/articleview/article_view.asp?article_class=8&no=201599&rel_no=1)

This is most evident in their political coverage. Before OhmyNews,
conservatives controlled 80% of Korea’s newspaper circulation. Then
OhmyNews gave a voice to progressives, inspiring massive nationwide
protests against the government. The protests, in turn, led to the
election of reformist Roh Moo Hyun, now known as “the first Internet
president.”[†](http://english.ohmynews.com/articleview/article_view.asp?article_class=8&no=201599&rel_no=1)
The furious conservative National Assembly responded by voting to
impeach Roh on technical grounds. OhmyNews readers again organized and
overthrew the Assembly in the next election, reinstating Roh. There’s no
reason why what happened in South Korea can’t happen here. Overcoming
the tide of misinformation is hard work, but working together committed
citizens can make amazing progress, even when up against the most
powerful interests. Out society has an extraordinary level of freedom
and openness. Whether we use that freedom to seek out the truth or
remain content with conventional platitudes is up to us.

*Note to readers:* Citations have been added to the previous articles in
the series.


Life in Suburbia: Land of Cliche
================================

June 16, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/suburbia)

* * * * *

From my desk in my apartment in Cambridge, I see the green leaves of
trees out the window and, when I step closer, winding streets with
quirky shops and interesting people stretching out below them. From my
desk in my old home in suburban Chicago, you see the same trees, but
behind them is asphalt and McMansion and long twisting driveways.

No one here uses public transportation. The city does have a train
station, but one gets the sense that its purpose is mostly decorative —
train stations remind people of the imaginary small town life that
suburbs attempt to imitate. To get out to your house, you instead drive
down long stretches of drab gray highway, besotted by hideous billboards
and lined with ugly office parks.

The weather is certainly nice. On most days, if you go for a walk it’s
quite beautiful — as long as you keep your head pointed at the sky,
where the bright green leaves interweave with the brilliant blue. But as
soon as you look down there are SUVs driving the wealthy to their
half-hidden palazzos — just enough visible to be bragging, just enough
hidden to be private.

Whereas in Cambridge the ambitious try to fill their houses with books,
in suburbia you go for art and interior decorating. The tasteless fill
their houses with large marble staircases and glistening chandeliers;
the more tasteful prefer bright white rooms accented with sculptures and
pictures — specific enough not to be intellectual, but abstract enough
to be *art*.

You came back here to raise a family, but you wouldn’t even consider
sending them to public school. Why would you, when there’s a perfectly
good private school just twenty minutes away? There the kids are white
and wealthy. After all, how could they be anything else at these tuition
prices? The school does give out scholarships, but only based on
“merit”: “interviews, teacher recommendations, examination results and
current school records”. The school is in the wealthiest zip code in
America, surrounded by trees and houses, like everything else in
suburbia.

The school is preparing for graduation. You see a slide show of those
about to receive their diplomas, seen when they’re so young that the
smiles leap off their faces. How could anything so precious be unhappy
here, with everything in its right place? Afterwards the families mingle
in the courtyards, surrounded by the gleaming metal of the newly-built
extensions.

Not too far, another group of kids hides behind trees by the parking
lot, protecting a cooler full of water balloons they use to pelt their
fellow students as they try to reach their cars. One kid, his yellow
country-club sweater tied around his neck, complimenting his finessed
blond hair, hides behind a glass door, fear visible in his eyes as he
looks at his newly-purchased convertible and prays it won’t get hit. (He
bought it, the kids explain, to match his new girlfriend. Then they turn
and pelt two girls walking by.)

Despite their brazen acts, the kids are quite afraid — afraid of getting
caught. They hide at the sight of parents or teachers and they restrain
themselves from hitting the head of school’s daughter. But they needn’t
worry. Parents see right through the charade and laugh it off. *Oh kids,
oh kids and their water balloons. How delightful!* they say to
themselves as they scurry to their cars.

The kids were right to guard the parking lots; not only is suburbia
unmanageable without a car, driving cars is a central part of the
culture: what kind, at what age, and where to? The funny thing is that
there simply aren’t that many places to go. There’s your house, and your
friends, and the shops uptown or at the mall.

Not that there’s much difference between the two anymore. The malls have
become open-air and the town centers have become so desiccated that
they’re little different, just chain shops surrounded by fake walkways
to other chain shops. The difference, I suppose, is that in town centers
no one uses the walkways — why bother when you can drive?

While the kids enjoy their eating and shopping, the mothers get down to
business at the grocery store, a menagerie of food and drink and color.
Huge carts are filled and paid for and then passed off to low-wage
Mexicans, who load them in your car as you drive out of the parking lot.

In between the malls and downtown, even the fakery disappears and the
raw commercialism that pervades the suburb is left naked, assuming its
default form of ugly highway signs and strip malls, all in an almost
nausea inducing gray, stretching out in all directions, leaving little
escape.

Not all the people of the suburbs are cold and vicious as their
surroundings. For the most part, they’re “liberals”, the kind who are
deeply affected by the plight of the homeless as they head back to their
minivan. A small sign at the menagerie of a grocery store draws
attention to the plight of the hungry. No, you don’t have to feed them;
just feel bad: the sign advertises [“national hunger awareness
day”](http://www.hungerday.org/) (sponsored, the web site says, “by many
prominent organizations” — organizations like Macy’s, Southwest
Airlines, and the Food Marketing Institute).

After all, this is the generation of the New Left. 25 miles south,
Chicago was rocked by the ‘68 Democratic Convention, where kids charged
the city while filmed by newscameras, before the Chicago police decided
to start beating up on both. The suburbanites didn’t participate, of
course, but they watched it on the news and felt sympathy for their
brethren and invited the indicted Chicago 7 up to give a talk.

The war is now Iraq, not Vietnam, and the protest is more muted. A
sculpture in the town center draws attention to our dead servicemen,
while old ladies occasionally stage protests with large signs. Now the
antiestablishment kids have become establishment parents, Mayor Daleys
of their own households, full of tensions no less visible than those
which engulfed Chicago.

Son one plays music too loud for son two who insists that right this
minute he needs to play a video game. And when these fighting factions
are supposed to come together, as in a graduation, the tensions boil
over, parents screeching at kids who scream at each other, dragged down
to the car where they argue about which windows to open and settings for
the AC, until, realizing that they’re all stuck there together, tensions
cool down somewhat. Still, it doesn’t seem like much fun for anyone.

At the graduation, everyone has a camera to immortalize this precious
moment. They force everyone into straightening their rarely-worn suits
and dresses and smiling in rarely-seen ways so that the camera can
“capture the moment”, an instant of artifice, entirely yanked from time,
its history completely erased so that the fake smiles may be preserved.

The graduation itself is a whole event of such artifice: the students
are trained to walk down the aisles absurdly slowly (while the organist
stretches Pomp and Circumstance far, far beyond the breaking point) so
that every parent may get copious photos of them standing in the aisle.
Once on stage they fake their love for teachers they hated only days
ago, while dressed in fake costumes and standing in front of a fake set.
The parents are given programs whose professional typography hides the
normal disarray of school, makes them think this place is Professional.

Oh, the absurdity of it all: putting all that effort into making
memories they won’t remember of good times they never had.

But I guess that’s suburbia — the fake coat of paint that lets you
pretend your unhappy life is just as nice as everyone else’s, even if it
easily flakes off.


A Clarification
===============

June 20, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/clarifying)

* * * * *

A lot of people seem to have misunderstood my piece [A Non-Programmer’s
Apology](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nonapology) and my blog more
generally. Let me explain:

I am 19 and live in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an apartment with two
others. The three of us together work full-time on the site
[reddit.com](http://reddit.com/) and I spend most of my days working on
programming and various related tasks for it.

In the nights and weekends I read and think and write. I’m working on a
large book project, which I expect to take years, and which I don’t
discuss much on the Web.

I also think about lots of things, many of which don’t relate to either
reddit or the book project. When a thought crystalizes I type it up and
post it to my blog. I don’t read it before I post it, I don’t show it to
anyone, and I don’t edit it. I literally sit down and type one word
after another and hit save and hit upload. (Obviously, there are some
exceptions, but this is standard practice.)

If you think the writing here is poor, that’s probably why. Real writing
takes editing. But I don’t consider this writing, I consider this
thinking. I like sharing my thoughts and I like hearing yours and I like
practicing expressing ideas, but fundamentally this blog is not for you,
it’s for me. I’m sorry. Maybe that isn’t how it should be, but at least
for now that’s how it is. In my defense, nobody’s making you come here.

I plan to keep doing this until the company fails or becomes a huge
success.

Afterwards, I hope to work on the book project (and a related project)
full time.

I hope that clears things up.


In Offense of Classical Music
=============================

June 20, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/classicalmusic)

* * * * *

I recently had to sit through a performance of Bach’s *Well-Tempered
Clavier* at the Chicago Symphony Orchestra (it was the conductor’s
farewell concert). At first it was simply boring, but as I listened more
carefully, it grew increasingly painful, until it became excruciatingly
so. I literally began tearing my hair out and trying to cut my skin with
my nails (there were large red marks when the performance was finally
over). The pianist, I was certain, kept flubbing the notes and getting
the timing off. But few around me seemed to agree. “Well, he certainly
plays it differently from Gould,” was the most they could say.

The audience, like that of private libraries and the FOX News Channel,
was decidedly old. I don’t recall seeing *anyone* who looked younger
than thirty. And, aside from thoughts of this whole
orchestras-playing-classical-music thing dying out, it made me wonder:
what’s so great about classical music?

Ask the old folks there and they’ll tell you that nothing really
compares. Listen to the stuff on the radio today and it’s all simply
repetitive melodies with stupid lyrics. And the thing is, they’re right:
the stuff on the radio does suck for the most part. But that’s not
really a fair comparison.

When I listen to good modern music, it takes my heart in its hands and
plays with it as it pleases — makes me soar, makes me sad, excited, and
mad. But when I listen to classical music, at most it simply occupies my
brain for a while. Is this simply a flaw in my perception or has music
really improved?

I think it’s possible to argue that music is actually getting better. As
humans, we clearly share a number of genetically-encoded similarities,
perhaps with some variation. For example, we almost all have two eyes,
although in different shapes, sizes, and colors. Imagine that we are
similarly endowed with some shared sense of musical appreciation (or,
put another way, emotional susceptibility). We all fall for the same
musical things, again with some variation.

If this is the case (and while I can’t really prove it, it seems at
least plausible to me that it is), then there would indeed be objective
standards for measuring music: better music would be more appreciated by
the “average person” or the majority of people or some such. And if
there are objective standards for measuring music, then music can get
better.

And, if we again imagine that what’s appreciated in music isn’t simply
random, that it involves certain traits (which seems pretty clear,
although again hard to prove), then not only can music get better, but
it probably *will*. Musicians will listen to old music, the majority of
them will enjoy the good songs of the past, and they’ll try to build
upon and improve that good material, following its patterns, creating
even better music. And the next generation will do the same, from a
further along starting point.

Does this prove that the latest Aimee Mann album (*The Forgotten Arm*)
is the best work of music yet to be created by humans? Of course not.
But it does mean it’s at least *possible*, that I’m not completely crazy
for thinking so.


What’s Freedom?
===============

June 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whosefreedom)

* * * * *

George Lakoff is a prominent cognitive scientist whose central insight
(which is not to say that the idea originates with him) is that we can
learn about the structure of our thoughts by looking carefully at the
words we use to express them. For example, we think of time as a line,
as you can see through phrases like “time line”, “looking forward”,
“further in the past”, etc. Similarly, we thinking is thought of as a
kind of seeing: “do you see what I mean?”, “pulled the wool over your
eyes”, “as you can see from the book”, “his talk was unclear”, “that
sentence is opaque”, etc.

Lakoff used these techniques to write a series of books describing the
structures of various ideas (*Metaphors We Live By*, *Philosophy in the
Flesh*, *Where Mathematics Comes From*, etc.) but after the Republican
Revolution of 1994, he turned the technique on politics, resulting in
his 1996 classic *Moral Politics*, which tries to explicate the
cognitive models of Democrats and Republicans.

After the election of Bush~2~, Lakoff began talking about how
Republicans were better at “framing”, or using language to get people to
agree with them, than Democrats. Lakoff that the process goes both ways:
language causes your mind to think of certain concepts which create
certain pathways in your brain. Thus Republicans, he said, through
massive repetition of certain phrases, were literally changing the
brains of the electorate to be more favorable to them. (“If this sounds
a bit scary,” he writes, “it should. This is a scary time.”)

Around the 2004 election, Lakoff skyrocketed to fame among Democrats,
who were convinced by his argument that fighting Republicans required
not just giving into Republican frames, but reframing the debate
themselves. He rushed out the slender book *Don’t Think of an Elephant*,
a cobbled-together guide on his basic ideas and how progressives could
use them. The book stayed on the *New York Times* bestseller list for
weeks.

Now Lakoff is back with a more studied work, *Whose Freedom?*, which
tries to focus in more detail on the differing views of one particular
concept: freedom. Lakoff starts the book by noting that in his 2004
speech at the Republican convention, Bush used “freedom”, “free”, or
“liberty” once every forty-three words. Most progressives think of this
simply as a stunt — using feel-good symbols like flag and words like
freedom to distract from the real issues. But Lakoff argues something
much deeper is going on: Bush is trying to change the meaning of freedom
itself.

So what is he trying to change it to? Right away, the book begins to
fall apart. Lakoff’s definition of freedom is so broad (it encompasses
democracy, opportunity, equality, fairness, education, health, the
press, the market, religion, the military, academia, and privacy) as to
be fundamentally meaningless: “Every progressive issue is ultimately
about freedom,” he concludes. And yet freedom is kept on as the book’s
organizing principle: instead of chapters about economics, religion, and
foreign policy, we have the chapters “Economic Freedom”, “Religion and
Freedom”, and “Foreign Policy and Freedom”.

This would be harmless if it was simply a rhetorical affectation, but
Lakoff still seems to think is fundamentally about freedom. As a result,
the chapters are not only weighed down with meaningless and silly
attempts to connect the topic to freedom (“Life is a progressive issue,
since progressive Christians are committed to promoting freedom, freedom
from oppression and pain and freedom to realize one’s dreams.” — actual
quote) but their actual substance is stripped bare, because it’s not
discussed in its own right, but merely as an aid to the book’s
discussion of freedom.

Thus instead of deriving his key theory of how family metaphors create
political views, by showing how he discovered this and how it explains a
lot about the world, he quickly asserts it and then tries to apply the
idea to the empty void of “freedom”. The result is a book that is
fundamentally vacuous — its main idea has no substance and its
supporting ideas have no explanation.

And for a linguist, Lakoff has a surprisingly tin ear for language. His
suggestions (like using the term “freedom judges” to respond to
“activist judges”) are so bad that I assume they must not be meant to be
taken literally (“judges that will fight for freedom” is more akin to
what Lakoff means).

It’s unclear how the book got into this sorry state, but the good news
is there’s hope. Lakoff’s Rockridge Institute has been putting out
thoughtful and valuable guides on how to think and talk about various
issues and they plan to publish their major work, the Progressive
Manual, this summer. Let us hope that book does what this could not.

*Disclosure:* I received a free review copy of Lakoff’s book fedexed to
me before the July 4 publication date.


Release Late, Release Rarely
============================

July 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rlrr)

* * * * *

When you look at something you’re working on, no matter what it is, you
can’t help but see past the actual thing to the ideas that inspired it,
your plans for extending it, the emotions you’ve tied to it. But when
others look at it, all they see is a piece of junk.

You only get one chance to make a first impression; why have it be
“junk”? Once that’s associated with your name or project, it’s tough to
scrape off. Even people who didn’t see it themselves may have heard
about it second-hand. And once they hear about it, they’re not likely to
see for themselves. Life’s too short to waste it on junk.

But when you release late, after everything has been carefully polished,
you can share something of genuine quality. Apple, for example,
sometimes releases stupid stuff, but it always looks good. Even when
they flub, people give them the benefit of the doubt. “Well, it looks
great but I don’t really like it” is a lot better then “it’s a piece of
junk”.

Still, you can do better. Releasing means showing it to the world.
There’s nothing wrong with showing it to friends or experts or even
random people in a coffee shop. The friends will give you the emotional
support you would have gotten from actual users, without the stress. The
experts will point out most of the errors the world would have found,
without the insults. And random people will not only give you most of
the complaints the public would, they’ll also tell you why the public
gave up even before bothering to complain.

This is why “release early, release often” works in “open source”:
you’re releasing to a community of insiders. Programmers know what it’s
like to write programs and they don’t mind using things that are
unpolished. They can see what you’re going to do next and maybe help you
get there.

The public isn’t like that. Don’t treat them like they are.


The Hard Sciences
=================

July 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hardscience)

* * * * *

If we say that science is the goal of trying to figure things out about
the world, then we see the sciences broadly classified into two
categories: “hard” and “soft”. In the former are subjects like physics,
biology, and perhaps the honorary inclusion of mathematics. The “soft”
sciences, by contrast, include fields like history, psychology,
sociology, and economics.

As you might gather from the terms involved, partisans of the hard
sciences often look down upon the softer sciences, considering them
barely worthy of the term science at all. Indeed, the soft sciences
rarely formulate general laws or clear predictions, as the harder
sciences sometimes do. But why is that?

The reason is, because the “soft” sciences are, in fact, *harder*.
Humans are far more complicated than atoms, trying to figure out how
they work is a great deal more difficult than coming up with the rules
of mechanics. As a result, the social sciences are less well developed,
which means there’s less to study, which means the fields are easier to
learn.

Nonetheless, since the field is so much harder, the people who make
progress in it should get *more* respect. Physicists can isolate atoms
and run an experiment; historians have to try to find clever ways to
make a “natural experiment”.

Obviously, the progress has to be actual, rather than simply perceived,
which is indeed a common confusion in the social sciences, but real
observers of science should reconsider who they esteem.


The Attraction of the Center
============================

July 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whycentrism)

* * * * *

“Centrism” is the tendency to see two different beliefs and attempt to
split the difference between them. The reason why it’s a bad idea should
be obvious: truth is independent of our beliefs, no less than any other
partisans, centrists ignore evidence in favor of their predetermined
ideology.

So what’s the attraction? First, it requires little thought: arguing for
a specific position requires collecting evidence and arguing for it.
Centrism, simply requires repeating some of what A is saying and some of
what B is saying and mixing them together. Centrists often don’t even
seem to care if the bits they take contradict each other.

Second, it’s somewhat inoffensive. Taking a strong stand on A or B will
unavoidably alienate some. But being a centrist, one can still maintain
friends on both sides, since they will find at least some things that
you espouse to be agreeable with their own philosophies.

Third, it makes it easier to suck up to those in charge, because the
concept of the “center” can easily move along with shifts in power. A
staunch conservative will have to undergo a major change of political
philosophy to get a place in liberal administration. A centrist can
simply espouse a few more positions from the conservatives and a few
less from the liberals and fit in just fine. This criteria explains why
centrists are so prevalent in the pundit class (neither administration
is tempted to really force them out) and why so many “centrist” pundits
espouse mostly conservative ideas these days (the conservatives are in
power).

Fourth, despite actually being a servant of those in power, centrism
gives one the illusion of actually being a serious, independent thinker.
“People on the right and on the left already know what they’re going to
say on every issue,” they might claim, “but we centrists make decisions
based on the situation.” (This excuse was recently used in a fundraising
letter by *The New Republic*.) Of course, the “situation” that’s used to
make these decisions is simply who’s currently in power, as discussed
above, but that part is carefully omitted.

Fifth, it appeals to the public. There’s tremendous dissatisfaction
among the public with the government and our system of politics. Despite
being precisely in the middle of this corrupt system, centrists can
claim that they’re actually “independents” and “disagree with both the
left and the right”. They can denounce “extremism” (which isn’t very
popular) and play the “moderate”, even when their positions are
extremely far from what the public believes or what the facts say.

Together, these reasons combine to make centrism an especially
attractive place to be in American politics. But the disease is far from
limited to politics. Journalists frequently suggest the truth lies
between the two opposing sources they’ve quoted. Academics try to
distance themselves from policy positions proposed by either party. And,
perhaps worst of all, scientists try to split the difference between two
competing theories.

Unfortunately for them, neither the truth nor the public necessarily
lies somewhere in the middle. Fortunately for them, more valuable
rewards do.

Exercise for the reader: What’s the attraction of “contrarianism”, the
ideology subscribed to by online magazines like *Slate*?


What Makes a Personality Scary?
===============================

July 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scarypeople)

* * * * *

I’ve noticed recently that I sometimes find myself a little afraid of
people’s personalities. It’s kind of a weird experience: it makes sense
to be afraid of people and other things that can hurt you, but being
afraid of a *personality*? It doesn’t make a lot of sense. Personalities
can seem quirky or interesting, but scary?

At first, I thought this was simply an odd personal tic, since you don’t
exactly hear anyone else talking about it. But on reflection, you
sometimes do. Imagine a movie, the heroine character learning about some
shocking evil deed the brave male lead has committed. “I don’t even know
who you are anymore,” she sobs. “You’re starting to scare me.”

What’s frightening, it would seem, is that people aren’t the way we
expected. They seemed to be brave and kind-hearted, but when the moment
was right they were capable of being crafty and manipulative. We’re
shocked, at first, because it’s not what we expected. “But he seemed so
nice… How could he do that?” Then we’re upset, because at some level it
seems like dishonesty. “He made me think he was a good person, yet he’s
capable of so much bad.” And finally, we’re scared, because if we were
wrong about him, then our view of the world seems a little bit
off.^[1](#fn:1)^

Having the world be off is frightening. I remember once I found myself
at Caltrain’s Milbrae station late at night. Milbrae is a huge new
station, a sprawling complex complete with a subway, 10 bus stops, a
train, and a huge parking garage. There’s nothing really around it for
quite a bit and it’s all open-air, with the cold night air chilling me
in my shirt, as I was transferring between the subway and the train. On
the way to the train tracks, I checked the schedule. The next train was
at 10:47 it said; it was 10:40, so I hurried downstairs to wait for the
train. I sat down and got out my book, waiting, and waiting, while the
train never came. I checked the clock — it was past 10:47, well past. So
I checked the downstairs schedule. There was no 10:47 train. I ran
upstairs to see if the schedule I’d read was simply out-of-date. It had
no 10:47 train either, nothing even close. I was certain I had read it
saying 10:47 — the memory was clear in my mind, and I’d followed the
line with my finger to make sure I had the right station.

I suddenly got quite scared. What was going on? Was I in a dream? Was
someone sneaking around the schedules on me? Was I the victim of some
practical joke? The fabric of my reality was being torn — something
clearly impossible had happened: a time had disappeared off a train
schedule. Things weren’t working the way I expected.

I later figured out, of course, that nothing so devious had happened. In
my hurry to catch the subway, I’d read the wrong side of the schedule —
the train was at 10:47am, not 10:47pm, and when I went back to look for
the time I looked at the right side of the schedule and, naturally, the
train wasn’t there. But my larger point is that tears in the way we
think things work are scary. If things are this bad when a piece of
paper doesn’t say what we expect, it’s not surprising that it’s worse
when people we know don’t behave the way we thought.

I say we here, but as I mentioned at the start, I seem to be a bit alone
on this. One possibility is that I’m hypersensitive to such emotions.
Other people might simply feel a prick at such a scheduling anomaly, but
I feel it as full-blown fear. Another (more flattering) possibility is
that I’m more perceptive about people than others; since others don’t
notice the duplicity, they don’t feel the associated fear.

The latter makes some sense to me, as the things that make me scared of
people are often very subtle, and others don’t seem to recognize them at
all, even when I ask them about it specifically. Even I can’t quite put
my finger on what it is sometime, it’s just a subtle signal that the
person isn’t being straight with you, that what they’re saying sounds
honest and friendly, but is actually manipulative. It’s not a pleasant
feeling.

* * * * *

1.  In talking about this sequence of emotions (shocked, upset, scared),
    I’m referring to a logical progression, not an actual one. I don’t
    really feel all of these things in order upon seeing someone scary,
    just the last. But the other emotions are what gets you to the
    last. [↩](#fnref:1)




The Fruits of Mass Collaboration
================================

July 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab)

* * * * *

I often think that the world needs to be a lot more organized. Lots of
people write reviews of television shows, but nobody seems to collect
and organize them all. Good introductory guides to subjects are
essential for learning, yet I only stumble upon them by chance. The
cumulative knowledge of science is one of our most valuable cultural
products, yet it can only be found scattered across thousands of short
articles in hundreds of different journals.

I suspect the same thoughts occur to many of a similar cast of mind,
since there’s so much effort put into discouraging them. The arbiters of
respectable opinion are frequently found to mock such grand projects or
point out deficiencies in them. And a friend of mine explained to me
that soon out of school he nearly killed himself by trying to embark on
such a grand project and now tries to prevent his friends from making
the same mistake.

One can, of course, make the reverse argument: since there is so much
need for such organization projects, they must be pretty impossible. But
upon closer inspection, that isn’t true. Is there a project more grand
than an encyclopedia or a dictionary? Who dares to compress all human
knowledge or an entire language into a single book? And yet, there’s not
just one but several brands of each!

It seems that when the audience is large enough (and just about everyone
has use for encyclopedias and dictionaries), it is possible to take on
grand projects. This suggests that the hold-up is not practical, but
economic. The funding simply isn’t there to do the same for other
things.

But all this is only true for the era of the book, where such a project
means gathering together a group of experts and having them work
full-time to build a Reference Work which can be published and sold
expensively to libraries. I tend to avoid net triumphalism, but the
Internet, it would seem, changes that. Wikipedia was created not by
dedicated experts but by random strangers and while we can complain
about its deficiencies, all admit that it’s a useful service.

The Internet is the first medium to make such projects of mass
collaboration possible. Certainly numerous people send quotes to Oxford
for compilation in the Oxford English Dictionary, but a full-time staff
is necessary sort and edit these notes to build the actual book (not to
mention all the other work that must be done). On the Internet, however,
the entire job — collection, summarization, organization, and editing —
can be done in spare time by mutual strangers.

An even more striking, but less remarked-upon, example is Napster.
Within only months, almost as a by-product, the world created the most
complete library of music and music catalog data ever seen. The
contributors to this project didn’t even realize they were doing this!
They all thought they were simply grabbing music for their own personal
use. Yet the outcome far surpassed anything consciously attempted.

The Internet fundamentally changes the practicalities of large
organization projects. Things that previously seemed silly and
impossible, like building [a detailed guide to every television
show](http://tviv.org/) are now being done as a matter of course. It
seems like we’re in for an explosion of such modern reference works,
perhaps with new experiments into tools for making them.


The Techniques of Mass Collaboration: A Third Way Out
=====================================================

July 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab2)

* * * * *

I’m not the first [to suggest that the Internet could be used for
bringing users together to build grand
databases](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab). The most famous
example is the Semantic Web project (where, in full disclosure, I worked
for several years). The project, spearheaded by Tim Berners-Lee,
inventor of the Web, proposed to extend the working model of the Web to
more structured data, so that instead of simply publishing text web
pages, users could publish their own databases, which could be
aggregated by search engines like Google into major resources.

The Semantic Web project has received an enormous amount of criticism,
much (in my view) rooted in misunderstandings, but much legitimate as
well. In the news today is just the most recent example, in which famed
computer scientist turned Google executive [Peter Norvig challenged Tim
Berners-Lee](http://news.com.com/Google+exec+challenges+Berners-Lee/2100-1025_3-6095705.html)
on the subject at a conference.

The confrontation symbolizes the (at least imagined) standard debate on
the subject, which Mark Pilgrim termed [million dollar markup versus
million dollar
code](http://diveintomark.org/archives/2002/12/29/million_dollar_markup).
Berners-Lee’s W3C, the supposed proponent of million dollar markup,
argues that users should publish documents that state in special
languages that computers can process exactly what they want to say.
Meanwhile Google, the supposed proponent of million dollar code, thinks
this is an impractical fantasy, and that the only way forward is to
write more advanced software to try to extract the meaning from the
messes that users will inevitably create.[\^1]

[\^1]: I say supposed because although this is typically how the debate
is seen, I don’t think either the W3C or Google actually hold the strict
positions on the subject typically ascribed to them. Nonetheless, the
question is real and it’s convenient to consider the strongest forms of
the positions.

But yesterday I suggested what might be thought of as a third way out;
one Pilgrim might call million dollar users. Both the code and the
markup positions make the assumption that users will be publishing their
own work on their own websites and thus we’ll need some way of
reconciling it. But Wikipedia points to a different model, where all the
users come to *one* website, where the interface for inputting data in
the proper format is clear and unambiguous, and the users can work
together to resolve any conflicts that may come up.

Indeed, this method strikes me as so superior that I’m surprised I don’t
see it discussed in this context more often. Ignorance doesn’t seem
plausible; even if Wikipedia was a late-comer, sites like
[ChefMoz](http://chefmoz.org/) and
[MusicBrainz](http://musicbrainz.org/) followed this model and were
Semantic Web case studies. (Full disclosure: I worked on the Semantic
Web portions of MusicBrainz.) Perhaps the reason is simply that both
sides — W3C and Google — have the existing Web as the foundation for
their work, so it’s not surprising that they assume future work will
follow from the same basic model.

One possible criticism of the million dollar users proposal is that it’s
somehow less free than the individualist approach. One site will end up
being in charge of all the data and thus will be able to control its
formation. This is perhaps not ideal, certainly, but if the data is made
available under a free license it’s no worse than things are now with
free software. Those angry with the policies can always exercise their
right to “fork” the project if they don’t like the direction things are
going. Not ideal, certainly, but we can try to dampen such problems by
making sure the central sites are run as democratically as possible.

Another argument is that innovation will be hampered: under the
individualist model, any person can start doing a new thing with their
data, and hope that others will pick up the technique. In the
centralized model, users are limited by the functionality of the
centralized site. This too can be ameliorated by making the centralized
site as open to innovation as possible, but even if it’s closed, other
people can still do new things by downloading the data and building
additional services on top of it (as indeed [many have done with
Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Tools)).

It’s been eight years since Tim Berners-Lee published his [Semantic Web
Roadmap](http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.html) and it’s
difficult to deny that things aren’t exactly going as planned. Actual
adoption of Semantic Web technologies has been negligible and nothing
that promises to change that appears on the horizon. Meanwhile, the
million dollar code people have not fared much better. Google has been
able to launch a handful of very targeted features, like [music
search](http://www.google.com/musicsearch?q=google) and [answers to very
specific kinds of
questions](http://www.google.com/search?q=when+was+tim+berners-lee+born%3F)
but these are mere conveniences, far from changing the way we use the
Web.

By contrast, Wikipedia has seen explosive growth, Amazon.com has become
the premier site for product information, and when people these days
talk about user-generated content, they don’t even consider the
individualized sense that the W3C and Google assume. Perhaps it’s time
to try the third way out.


What Does Blogspace Look Like?
==============================

July 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/blogviz)

* * * * *

I’ve been analyzing the content of blogs lately, looking for patterns.
It’s a huge amount of data, which makes for some tricky technical
problems. Finally, tonight, thanks to some help from friends and the
[Large Graph Layout](http://lgl.sourceforge.net/) package, I’ve finally
got some results. And they’re stunning. Ladies and gentlemen, the
blogosphere:

![graph of blogspace](image1_blogviz)

And, for fun, let’s zoom in one one of those small splotches:

![graph of the hitchens node](image2_blogviz)

[image1_blogviz]: image1_blogviz.jpg
[image2_blogviz]: image2_blogviz.jpg

On Losing Weight
================

July 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/losingweight)

* * * * *

Exactly three months ago, [I wrote about the Shangri-La
Diet](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet). While I started on it
basically immediately, it wasn’t until exactly two months ago that I got
a scale to measure my weight with (so some data has been lost). Since I
got the scale, however, I’ve lost over twenty pounds.

Shockingly, losing weight has to be one of the easiest things I’ve ever
done. I simply don’t eat unless I’m really hungry and then I eat as
little as possible (a couple crackers, for example). Most days I just
have a couple crackers in the evening. It saves time and money and
hassle (and makes it easy to eat healthy) and while I do get some weird
looks from friends at restaurants, always being a fussy eater that’s
nothing new. (Furthermore, [there’s some
evidence](http://www.blog.sethroberts.net/2006/06/22/meal-skipping-good-or-bad/)
that not eating significantly prolongs lifespan.)

The one thing that really did surprise me is that [while I predicted
there would be strong social pressures to lose
weight](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture), in reality all the
pressure seemed to go the other way. Friends and acquaintances urge me
to eat more, doctors think I’m sick, family members suggest I have an
eating disorder. Part of this is probably just due to novelty: While
“eat less” is standard advice for losing weight, because we all have set
points no one is actually able to pull it off. Thus when someone
actually does losing weight by eating less, it’s usually because they
really are sick or something like that. But in my darker moments, I
wonder if part of it is selfish. The extraordinarily thin people
encouraging me to eat more, I darkly wonder, don’t want me to be like
them. The people who need to lose some weight don’t like the example of
my success. I don’t like thinking this way, and I have no evidence for
it, but it’s hard to resist.

There’s not much more to say; food is even less a part of my life than
it was before. I still plan to lose more weight and will provide further
updates accordingly. Still, since many people seem to be interested in
the topic (and in keeping with the theme of my blog), a diary of my
three months follows.

* * * * *

The first thing I noticed was the burping. When losing weight, it seems
you burp quite a bit. But even worse is the feeling of *wanting* to
burp. The olive oil, it seems, has inflated my stomach with gas, making
me desperately want to burp, but I can’t. In fact, it was so painful
that I decided to stop taking the olive oil. I still ate less — it seems
like once the olive oil lowered my set point, it was easy to keep things
off from there. There were a couple days after eating lots where I would
feel hungry for long periods of time and had to ignore it, but if I did
that for a whole day, my set point went down, just like with the olive
oil.

I [went back home](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/suburbia) and saw some
old friends at my high school’s graduation. Many of them commented on
how thin I was. I was kind of surprised, because I didn’t think I was
noticeably thinner yet, but I have to say I enjoyed the compliment.
While on this vacation I told myself I’d forget the diet and would eat
all the good home foods I missed. But even doing this, I couldn’t gain
weight while on vacation. I was taken out to a nice restaurant downtown
but couldn’t finish my hamburger (which I typically had no problem
doing) — when I was half way through if I took another bite I felt like
I was going to throw up, so I just stopped. When I got back, I weighed
basically the same as when I’d left.

As I lost more weight I began to feel better. I’d look in the mirror and
notice the fat that had disappeared from my chest, or when lying down
I’d notice my legs were thinner. I felt like I had more energy. I felt
happier. I felt more mobile, more able to move around and do things now
that there was less of me. It felt wonderful.

One week I lost seven pounds in almost as many days and friends began to
look at me with concern. But I didn’t mind; I thought it was great. I
had started eating significantly less, hardly anything at all really.
When I moved into this new apartment (just as I was starting the diet),
I thought I would have a hard time finding novel places to eat each day.
But it hasn’t been hard at all; I’ve hardly gone out to eat by myself
*once* since I started the diet, except to treat myself to a food I
already knew I loved.

Writing about a gastric bypass (a surgery in which the stomach is shrunk
to help those who are extremely overweight lose weight) patient, surgeon
Atul Gawande describes a sensation I found extremely familiar:

> […] She [lost so much weight that] was unrecognizable to anyone who
> had known her before, and even to herself. “I went to bars to see if I
> could get picked up—and I did,” she said. “I always said no,” she
> quickly added, laughing. “But I did it anyway.”
>
> The changes weren’t just physical, though. She had slowly found
> herself to have a profound and unfamiliar sense of willpower over
> food. She no longer *had* to eat anything: “Whenever I eat, somewhere
> in the course of that time I end up asking myself, ‘Is this good for
> you? Are you going to put on weight if you eat too much of this?’ And
> I can just stop.” The feeling baffled her. She knew, intellectually,
> that the surgery was why she no longer ate as much as she used to. Yet
> she felt as if she were choosing not to do it.
>
> Studies report this to be a typical experience of successful gastric
> bypass patients. […]

(Atul Gawande, *Complications*, 174)

The newfound willpower allowed me to be more conscious about my diet. I
started thinking about what foods I wanted to eat and researching the
topic of nutrition. I read Walter Willett’s book about the results of
his epidemiological nutrition studies and begun looking at the labels of
boxes I ate. I begun ordering different things at restaurants when I did
eat and buying different things at the supermarket. But most of all I
found myself eating less.

When this proved not to be enough, I found myself exercising. I seemed
to be more out-of-shape now than it did when I started — I suspect with
all the weight loss I lost some other things too — but exercising was
probably easier to find the motivation for now. I fixed up my watch and
started timing myself, trying to make sure I lost the weight I wanted
to; this, of course, after I already lost twenty pounds and had stopped
eating almost entirely.

Losing weight had other effects too, some that saved further time.
Although I feel I have more energy overall, I still get tired. Sometimes
I just lie in bed thinking, when I feel little pops in my thighs as my
body breaks into the fat it has stored up over the years to find energy
to fuel me with. And at those moments I can only smile.


I Love the University
=====================

July 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingmit)

* * * * *

I went to visit a friend today at MIT. The past few days I’d been
reading more stuff from academia and just that morning I was reading
responses to my old posts at Stanford, so academia’s siren song had been
on my mind. But getting off the subway at MIT, with me full of energy
after a morning jog, the sun shining brightly down, I couldn’t help but
feel like I was missing something, seeing smiles on the faces of the
young geniuses who were everywhere around me.

Perhaps it’s natural, when doing something so greedy and practical as a
startup, to pine for the idealized world of academia. Its image as a
place in an idyllic location filled with smart people has always been
attractive; even more so with the sense that by being there one can get
smarter simply through osmosis. People describe a place of continual
geekiness, of throwing chemicals into the river and building robots in
free time. A magical place for hackers to just enjoy themselves.

It’s not that I don’t enjoy my work; it’s just that I feel like I’m
getting dumber doing it. Or, at least, that I’m not getting as smart as
I should.

This academaphilia isn’t new. It’s clearly what drove magazines like
Lingua Franca and makes saying obscure names and words so impressive.
But for some reason it feels stronger now. I’ve started downloading
class syllabuses off the Web and doing the reading assignments at night;
I’ve started thinking about how to sneak into courses and hang out with
academics. In Cambridge, this paradise seems so close, so acessible.

And yet, it’s hardly paradise at all. When I was actually there I was
turned off by the conformism, the lack of interest in real work, the
politics, the pointless assignments. My lunch date is a grad student and
he tells me of the internecine squabbles, the overspecialization, the
abandonment, the insecurity.

I go back to the W3C’s offices and stand at the balcony. Down below, Tim
Berners-Lee discusses details of a project with a group of kids who
presumably took this on as summer job. I was once one of those kids,
working there, and I think about why I left and why I miss it. I marvel
at the pointlessness, the impracticality, the waste.

The sky is overcast now, the crowds of students have thinned out, and
those that remain scurry from place to place with their heads down. I’m
tired now, I feel sadder, and I wonder how I lost so much so quickly.

I want to feel nostalgic, I want to feel like there’s this place, just a
couple subway stops away, where everything will be alright. A better
place, a place I should be in, a place I can go back to. But even just
visiting it, the facts are plain. It doesn’t exist, it never has. I’m
nostalgic for a place that never existed.


Nutrition Basics
================

July 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/basicnutrition)

* * * * *

As part of changing my eating habits, I’ve become quite interested on
the subject of nutrition. I can’t seem to find a good guide to the
subject online, so in the spirit of flailing in public until someone
comes to my aid, I thought I’d write up what I think I know. Feel free
to correct me or point me to better sources in the comments.

**Calories** are the basis of eating; they’re a measure of the amount of
energy a food provides. Your body gets calories from the food you eat
and spends them to keep you moving. If you get more calories than you
spend, your body stores the excess as fat. If you spend more than you
get, your body burns some of the fat it’s stored up (for just such an
occasion).

Thus the standard advice for losing weight: eat less, exercise more.
Eating less brings fewer calories in, while exercising more uses up more
of them. Unfortunately, both of these things are quite hard to achieve,
because the body seems to regulate them through [the use of “set
points”](http://www.slate.com/id/2663/): your body keeps track of how
much fat you have through a chemical called leptin and makes you hungry
if you’re starting to lose weight. Thus, if you skip a meal in the
morning, it’ll be sure to make you extra hungry in the evening, so that
your overall weight doesn’t change.

A similar setpoint seems to operate for exercise. In one experiment,
doctors measured how much children moved around with pedometers. Then
they tried forcing the children to exercise by giving them a PE class.
They found that when kids were forced to exercise at school, they
exercised less at home, and ended up doing the same amount of exercise
overall. So just as your body seems to make you hungry when you’re
losing weight and full when you’re gaining it, it seems to make you
tired when you’ve burned too many calories and antsy when you haven’t
burned enough.

Of course, we’re not total slaves to such motivations — we can force
ourselves when to eat when full or not to eat when hungry, to exercise
when tired or to stay still when antsy — but it’s worth keeping in mind
what we’re up against.

**Fats** have gotten a bad rap, most likely because they share a name
with body fat but also, [some
argue](http://www.westonaprice.org/knowyourfats/lowfatcapitalism.html),
because they seem lower-class. In truth, however, they’re largely just
one way to get calories, and a calorie is a calorie no matter where it
comes from.

Fats also have effects on **cholesterol**, a key building block for your
body’s cells. There are two types of cholesterol — known informally as
good and bad cholesterol. Good cholesterol consists of tightly-packed
proteins of cholesterol in your blood stream, allowing cholesterol to be
efficiently transported where it needs to go. Bad cholesterol is less
densely packed and its cholesterol ends up sticking in the walls of
arteries, clogging them and leading to heart disease. Fats have varying
effects on cholesterol. Saturated fats should be avoided: they increase
levels of bad cholesterol (although they also increase good
cholesterol). Unsaturated fats, however, whether monounsaturated or
polyunsaturated, are good: they lower bad cholesterol and raising good
cholesterol. *Trans* fats are just the reverse: they increase bad
cholesterol levels *and* decrease good ones; it’s recommended they be
avoided as much as possible.

Often nutrition labels only break out unsaturated fats and trans fats;
you have to calculate the amount of saturated fat by subtracting these
from the amount of total fat. The goal, remember, is to avoid trans fats
whenever possible, avoid saturated fats, and go for unsaturated fats.

**Carbohydrates** are another source of calories, the kind found in
white wheat products, like bread and pasta. **Sugars** are a form of
carbohydrate and, in fact, the body breaks down other carbohydrates into
simple sugars. The problem with sugars is that they go directly into the
bloodstream, spiking your blood sugar level. This in itself is
unhealthy, but it’s even worse when the level inevitably crashes and you
begin to feel hungry again and eat even more.

The exception is with fiber, which the body can’t break down. Foods made
from whole wheat are high in fiber, so your body takes longer to digest
them and the sugar intake is spread out over a longer period of time.
Thus while carbohydrates might generally be avoided, whole wheat
products (along with fruits and vegetables), include additional
nutrients as well as having a safe impact on blood sugar, and are the
foundation of a healthy diet.

**Protein** is a similar essential nutrient, allowing the body to make
essential components of muscle and hair and so on. If you don’t get
enough (about 9 grams of protein for every 20 pounds), the body begins
breaking down its tissues. (Eating far too much protein, however, as
people in low-carb diets do, can be unhealthy as it absorbs calcium from
your bones.) While protein can be found in animal products, whole wheat
bread is a also an excellent source — a single slice contains five grams
of protein. Unfortunately, the proteins found in grains and vegetables
are incomplete, so you either need to get some (complete) animal protein
or eat a variety of them.

**Calcium** is necessary for building bones and teeth, maintaining the
heart’s rhythmym, and more. Deficiency can lead to weakened bones and
fractures. While dairy products contain significant amounts of calcium,
they also contain a lot of saturated fat and has been linked to some
cancers. Many other foods are fortified with calcium and some vegetables
(kale and collard greens, dried beans, and legumes) are also a good
source.

**Vitamins** do all sorts of good things, as well as warding off
diseases like scurvy and rickets. They’re often added to juices and
cereals and can be taken by themselves in a daily multivitamin as well.

For additional information, check out:

-   [Nutrition Source](http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/),
    Harvard School of Public Health



What is going on here?
======================

July 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/about)

* * * * *

In his 1959 classic, *The Sociological Imagination*, the great
sociologist C. Wright Mills told students of the discipline:

> As a social scientist, you have to … capture what you experience and
> sort it out; only in this way can you hope to use it to guide and test
> your reflection, and in the process shape yourself as an intellectual
> craftsman. But how can you do this? One answer is: you must set up a
> blog…
>
> In such a blog … there is joined personal experience and professional
> activities, studies under way and studies planned. In this blog, you …
> will try to get together what you are doing intellectually and what
> you are experiencing as a person. here you will not be afraid to use
> your experience and relate it directly to various work in progress. By
> serving as a check on repetitious work, your blog also enables you to
> conserve your energy. It also encourages you to capture
> ‘fringe-thoughts’: various ideas which may be byproducts of everyday
> life, snatches of conversation overheard in the street, or, for that
> matter, dreams. Once noted, these may lead to more systematic
> thinking, as well as lend intellectual relevance to more directed
> experience.
>
> …The blog also helps you build up the habit of writing. … In
> developing the blog, you can experiment as a writer and this, as they
> say, develop your powers of expression.

Actually, he called it a “file” instead of a blog, but the point remains
the same: becoming a scientific thinker requires practice and writing is
a powerful aid to reflection.

So that’s what this blog is. I write here about thoughts I have, things
I’m working on, stuff I’ve read, experiences I’ve had, and so on.
Whenever a thought crystalizes in my head, I type it up and post it
here. I don’t read over it, I don’t show it to anyone, and I don’t edit
it — I just post it.

I don’t consider this writing, I consider this thinking. I like sharing
my thoughts and I like hearing yours and I like practicing expressing
ideas, but fundamentally this blog is not for you, it’s for me. I hope
that you enjoy it anyway.


Simple Tips for Longer Living
=============================

July 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/healthytips)

* * * * *

Understanding the human body and food’s effects on it over long periods
of time is hard. Counting, by contrast, is easy. This, at least, is the
premise behind the Nurses Health Study, a multi-decade project by
Harvard to gather empirical information about nutrition. The idea behind
the study is simple: collect a reasonably large group of people all in a
rather similar situation (nurses) and have them fill out a yearly survey
with two questions: “what did you eat?” and “are you dead yet?” They’ve
been doing this since 1976.

Then you simply punch the information into a computer and figure out
what foods kill people. The results, as described in the associated book
*Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy* provide some simple tips for living longer.

**Replace white bread with whole wheat.** White bread is simply whole
wheat bread shorn of all its nutritional value. Whole wheat has more
nutrients, more protein, etc. Plus, white bread is metabolized quickly
by your body so it leads to huge spikes in blood sugar which have
unhealthy effects on your body and make you hungry after you crash;
whole wheat bread is digested more evenly.

**Replace burgers with chicken.** Dark meat when grilled can lead to
potential carcinogens, whereas white meat is overall healthier. Chicken
contains less saturated (bad) fat while dark meat may give you too much
iron.

**Replace soft drinks with water.** These results [are from the same
study](http://www.usatoday.com/news/health/2004-06-08-diabetes-soda_x.htm)
but weren’t featured in the book. Drinking a soda makes you 85% more
likely to develop diabetes and can cause you to gain up to ten pounds.
“It’s probably that high amounts of sugar in the bloodstream put an
increased demand for insulin on the pancreas,” the study’s author
explains.

I’m about the fussiest eater I know and even I can handle these changes.
Whole wheat bread even tastes better than white.

*Disclaimer:* I know nothing about nutrition, this is simply what I took
away from reading one book.


Solidarity for the Shy: Achieving Critical Mass
===============================================

August 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/critmass)

* * * * *

The idea is simple: once a month, people meet up in the center of the
city with their bikes and then go on a ride through the city together,
taking over the streets through sheer numbers. There’s little explicit
politics — with the exception of a distaste for “car culture” — and no
leaders or official organizers. The whole thing, the (unofficial)
website explains, is a “xerocracy”: pass out xeroxes of your proposal
and maybe people will follow it. Sounds like fun.

I finally got myself together enough to go this month and, half an hour
before starting time, hopped on my bike and headed over. Unfortunately I
didn’t look at the directions all that carefully and ended up getting
lost in Boston. At one point I made a wrong turn and found myself
trapped in the middle of a major highway, facing the wrong direction,
and with little opportunity to make it to the side. Somehow, though, I
managed to escape.

I got lost several more times and became increasingly frustrated with
Boston’s loopy street plan. Forget about being bike-friendly, this city
isn’t even car-friendly. As I repeatedly reversed my path, I figured I
had no doubt missed the event. Just as well, I figured, since my leg
muscles were aching from a heavy day of running yesterday and the sky
was so cloudy that rain seemed inevitable. Still, I figured, I should at
least try to find the location of the meetup for next time.

I made sure to bring nothing with me save the key to my apartment (both
for aerodynamism and in case I got arrested — in New York, the police
have been known to harass and arrest CMers for “parading without a
permit”) so I don’t know what time I arrived, but I do know how my face
lit up when I saw the mass of bicycles and cyclists arranged at the
park, even as the wind was trying to blow me over.

The park was a small right triangle,taking up less than half the block.
On one side was a farmer’s market, closing up shop for the day. On the
other was a small protest about Israel’s invasion of Lebanon, with many
waving Lebanese flags and a speaker on a podium (whose voice was
amplified by portable radios his associates carried around the crowd)
discussed the tragedy of the invasion. A fat balding man waved a sign
reading “Moderate Muslims: Help US Fight Islamonazism”, but things were
otherwise quite civil.

Finally, on the hypotenuse, were the cyclists, just standing and
chatting. By the time I’d made my way over to them, I noticed they were
biking around in a circle together, so I joined in, smiling at the
sight. We all biked around for a while until someone shouted “Mike, go
right!” Mike did, exiting onto the street, and the crowd followed.

For the most part, I tried to stay in the middle of the pack. Bikes rode
on all sides of me, while cars were stopped in their tracks. Frustrated,
many of them pounded on their horns. In response, the crowd imitated
their honk, except shouting “woohoo” as the noise, as if the cars were
cheering them on.

We were particularly amused at the sight of a duck tour stopped in its
tracks. I didn’t catch what happened next, but from what I heard, the
duck tour tried to break into the mass and ended up running right into
the car next to it, greatly amusing all the massers.

Before we started, I overheard someone discussing about how last time a
car tried to break into the mass as it was passing by. He said this no
so much in anger but rather in amazement at the audacity of the idea. If
the mass had any opinions, it definitely felt that the street was
rightly its.

To protect against future such incursions, a couple people with long
bikes stood in front of cars at intersections, acting as human
barricades, then sprinting back to the front of the mass so they could
do it again. At one intersection, they even tried to placate the cars.
“Oh, don’t worry, we” just be a second, just hold on one sec,” they
shouted too the cars, which the mass found hilarious.

It was probably just as well the cars stayed put. Once one managed to
break into it the mass, but quickly found itself stymied, like a
bewildered bear suddenly finding itself in the middle of a swarm of
honeybees.

When cars asked what we were all doing, we responded that we’d simply
decided to go out for a bike ride. When pedestrians asked, however, we
shouted “Critical Mass!” Still, despite our vehiclism, some cars did
explicitly shout their support for Critical Mass.

Throughout I’ve been referring to the mass as a single entity, but it
didn’t really feel like one. While there certainly were a lot of bikes,
and together we formed quite an imposing swarm, but despite engaging it
a coordinated activity, we related mostly as individuals, most people
just talking to the friends they’d come with. For the most part, there
just wasn’t much to talk about. I was riding my weirdo bike, so a lot of
people said something like “sweet bike”, but the conversation didn’t go
far beyond “did you build it?” Bikes were, perhaps, the only thing we
had in common. And even casual smalltalk seems exceedingly awkward in
such a situation. American education, it has been said, is about
learning how to be alone in a crowd. Perhaps its not surprising then
that it also teaches how to be alone at a mass protest.

The group, however, did make some attempt at community. When some began
falling behind, they’d shout “mass up!” encouraging the others to slow
down and catch up with the group. But this was more an issue of
practicality than community, though, as a dispersed mass had less
effect.

We winded around the city of Boston for a while. Cambridge is some
complex and entertaining, and I’m such a loner and stay-insider, that I
rarely find myself across the river in Boston. That’s probably a shame,
because from what I see of it, the city’s quite nice. I suppose I must
have been in the North End, which I gather is the nice neighborhood, but
I didn’t realize how much so. The streets turned into long promenades
upon which men in dashing suits would dash and attractive women walked
their dogs. The houses were intricate constructions of brick and, from
the outside at least, appeared exceedingly elegant. The whole scene
reminded me of the expensive parts of Manhattan. A fancy shopping
district was just blocks away.

After touring this part of the city, with so many twists and turns that
I completely lost track of where we were, we turned up at the bridge to
MIT. Storm clouds provided a backdrop to the horizon and as we crossed
we saw bolt of lightning come down from the clouds and connect with some
tall building. I wasn’t thrilled about getting my bike wet, but I
figured that as long as we were heading in the direction of my
apartment, I might as well continue on.

We rode up Mass Ave, Cambridge’s main street, past a noticeably
friendlier crowd of passersby. By the time we’d gotten half-way to
Harvard Square though, the rain started coming down, very quickly
accelerating to full sheets and then to buckets. The wind was blowing so
hard that the rain drops attacked my face like darts, making my eyes
sting. Even when I put my hand above my eyes for protection, they
managed to work their way around it and straight into my eyeballs. In
short order, I quickly became soaked through and through. It was a good
thing I brought nothing save those keys.

The massers, for the most part, embraced the rain, throwing their hands
in the air and cheering. And, since I had nothing to worry about getting
wet (except the bike, which had already been left out in the rain one
too many times), I did the same. It was liberating.

As we passed Harvard Square, the rain started pouring down even harder,
flooding the streets with water in which our bikes left beautiful
trails. We headed into a tunnel, screaming the entire length. Then we
stopped at the firehouse at the end, waiting for the rest to catch up,
until someone shouted “let’s go again!” and we headed back into the
tunnel in the other direction, again screaming. It was this point that
we began to turn around and head back to Boston, though by a circuitous
route I’d never seen before and didn’t quite understand. As we turned
away from my apartment, I thought about taking this chance to make my
exit and head home, but somehow riding home alone seemed more dangerous
that continuing on inside the protective bubble of the mass. So I
continued. The rain quickly died down, to the annoyance of some riders.
‘That’s all you got?’ one shouted. ‘Come on!’

By the time we got back to the bridge to Boston, I was feeling kind of
tired and couldn’t quite force myself to make it all the way up and, in
any event, wasn’t quite sure whether I should continue on with everyone.
The group had thinned significantly by this point, with people
presumably peeling off as we passed their houses. I decided to save the
full tour for another time and turned around to head back home.

Despite being physically tired and thoroughly soaked, I was exhilarated.
It was the most fun I’d ever had on a bicycle, despite its oddities and
flaws. I couldn’t wait to tell my friends.

As I rode home, I apparently committed some traffic error, leading some
jerk in a car to shout ‘Get the fuck off the road, you ass!’ It didn’t
faze me at all, though. ‘Get the fuck off *my* road,’ I thought.


Growth
======

August 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikigrowth)

* * * * *

[![](image1_wikigrowth)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Wikipedia)

[image1_wikigrowth]: image1_wikigrowth.jpg

The Smalltalk Question
======================

August 16, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smalltalkq)

* * * * *

One of the minor puzzles of American life is what question to ask people
at parties and suchly to get to know them.

“How ya doin’?” is of course mere formality, only the most troubled
would answer honestly for anything but the positive.

“What do you do?” is somewhat offensive. First, it really means “what
occupation do you hold?” and thus implies you do little outside your
occupation. Second, it implies that one’s occupation is the most salient
fact about them. Third, it rarely leads to further useful inquiry. For
only a handful of occupations, you will be able to say something
somewhat relevant, but even this will no doubt be slightly annoying or
offensive. (“Oh yeah, I always thought about studying history.”)

“Where are you from?” is even less fruitful.

“What’s your major?” (in the case of college students) turns sour when,
as is tragically all too often the case, students feel no real passion
for their major.

“What book have you read recently?” will cause the majority of Americans
who don’t read to flail, while at best only getting an off-the-cuff
garbled summary of a random book.

“What’s something cool you’ve learned recently?” puts the person on the
spot and inevitably leads to hemming and hawing and then something not
all that cool.

I propose instead that one ask “What have you been thinking about
lately?” First, the question is extremely open-ended. The answer could
be a book, a movie, a relationship, a class, a job, a hobby, etc. Even
better, it will be whichever of these is most interesting at the moment.
Second, it sends the message that thinking, and thinking about thinking,
is a fundamental human activity, and thus encourages it. Third, it’s
easiest to answer, since by its nature its asking about what’s already
on the person’s mind. Fourth, it’s likely to lead to productive dialog,
as you can discuss the topic together and hopefully make progress.
Fifth, the answer is quite likely to be novel. Unlike books and
occupations, people’s thoughts seem to be endlessly varied. Sixth, it
helps capture a person’s essence. A job can be forced by circumstance
and parentage, but our thoughts are all our own. I can think of little
better way to quickly gauge what a person is really like.

“What have you been working on lately?” can be seen, in this context, to
be clearly inferior, although similar.

So, what *have* you been thinking about lately?


Wikimedia at the Crossroads
===========================

August 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: **Wikimedia at the Crossroads**\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

A couple weeks ago I had the great privilege of attending Wikimania, the
international Wikimedia conference. Hundreds from all over the world
gathered there to discuss the magic that is Wikipedia, thinking hard
about what it means and why it works. It was an amazing intellectual and
emotional experience.

The main attraction was seeing the vibrant Wikipedia community. There
were the hardcore Wikipedians, who spend their days reviewing changes
and fixing pages. And there were the elder statesmen, like Larry Lessig
and Brewster Kahle, who came to meet the first group and tell them how
their work fits into a bigger picture. Spending time with all these
people was amazing fun — they’re all incredibly bright, enthusiastic
and, most shockingly, completely dedicated to a cause greater than
themselves.

At most “technology” conferences I’ve been to, the participants
generally talk about technology for its own sake. If *use* ever gets
discussed, it’s only about using it to make vast sums of money. But at
Wikimania, the primary concern was doing the most good for the world,
with technology as the tool to help us get there. It was an incredible
gust of fresh air, one that knocked me off my feet.

There was another group attending, however: the people holding up the
platform on which this whole community stands. I spent the first few
days with the mostly-volunteer crew of hackers who keep the websites up
and running. In later days, I talked to the site administrators who
exercise the power that the software gives them. And I heard much about
the Wikimedia Foundation, the not-for-profit that controls and runs the
sites.

Much to my surprise, this second group was almost the opposite of the
first. With a few notable exceptions, when they were off-stage they
talked gossip and details: how do we make the code stop doing this, how
do we get people to stop complaining about that, how can we get this
other group to like us more. Larger goals or grander visions didn’t come
up in their private conversations; instead they seemed absorbed by the
issues of the present.

Of course, they have plenty to be absorbed by. Since January,
Wikipedia’s traffic has more than doubled and this group is beginning to
strain under the load. At the technical level, the software development
and server systems are both managed by just one person, Brion Vibber,
who appears to have his hands more-than-full just keeping everything
running. The entire system has been cobbled together as the site has
grown, a messy mix of different kinds of computers and code, and keeping
it all running sounds like a daily nightmare. As a result, actual
software development goes rather slowly, which cannot help but affect
the development of the larger project.

The small coterie of site administrators, meanwhile, are busy dealing
with the ever-increasing stream of complaints from the public. The
recent Seigenthaler affair, in which the founding editor of *USA Today*
noisily attacked Wikipedia for containing an grievous error in its
article on him, has made people very cautious about how Wikipedia treats
living people. (Although [to judge just from the traffic
numbers](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikigrowth), one might think more
such affairs might be a good idea…) One administrator told me how he
spends his time scrubbing Wikipedia clean of unflattering facts about
people who call the head office to complain.

Finally, the Wikimedia Foundation Board seems to have devolved into
inaction and infighting. Just four people have been actually hired by
the Foundation, and even they seem unsure of their role in a
largely-volunteer community. Little about this group — which, quite
literally, controls Wikipedia — is known by the public. Even when they
were talking to dedicated Wikipedians at the conference, they put a
public face on things, saying little more than “don’t you folks worry,
we’ll straighten everything out”.

* * * * *

The plain fact is that Wikipedia’s gotten too big to be run by just a
couple of people. One way or another, it’s going to have to become an
organization; the question is what kind. Organizational structures are
far from neutral: whose input gets included decides what actions get
taken, the positions that get filled decide what things get focused on,
the vision at the top sets the path that will be followed.

I worry that Wikipedia, as we know it, might not last. That its feisty
democracy might ossify into staid bureaucracy, that its innovation might
stagnate into conservatism, that its growth might slow to stasis. Were
such things to happen, I know I could not just stand by and watch the
tragedy. Wikipedia is just too important — both as a resource and as a
model — to see fail.

That is why, after much consideration, I’ve decided to run for a seat on
the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board. I’ve been a fairly dedicated
Wikipedian since 2003, adding and editing pages whenever I came across
them. I’ve gone to a handful of Wikipedia meetups and even got my photo
on the front page of the *Boston Globe* as an example Wikipedian. But
I’ve never gotten particularly involved in Wikipedia politics — I’m not
an administrator, I don’t get involved in policy debates, I hardly even
argue on the “talk pages”. Mostly, I just edit.

And, to be honest, I wish I could stay that way. When people at
Wikimania suggested I run for a Board seat, I shrugged off the idea. But
since then, I’ve become increasingly convinced that I should run, if
only to bring attention to these issues. Nobody else seems to be
seriously discussing this challenge.

The election begins today and lasts three weeks. As it rolls on, I plan
to regularly publish essays like this one, examining the questions that
face Wikipedia in depth. Whether I win or not, I hope we can use this
opportunity for a grand discussion about where we should be heading and
what we can do to get there. That said, if you’re an eligible
Wikipedian, I hope that you’ll please [vote for
me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election).


Who Writes Wikipedia?
=====================

September 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: **Who Writes Wikipedia?**\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

**Translations:**
[日本語](http://www.hyuki.com/yukiwiki/wiki.cgi?WhoWritesWikipedia),
[Español](http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usuario:Chewie/Qui%C3%A9n_escribe_la_Wikipedia),
[Deutsch](http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benutzer:Avatar/Wer_schreibt_die_Wikipedia),
[Français](http://ulik.typepad.com/leafar/2006/09/qui_ecrit_wikip.html)
([add](mailto:me@aaronsw.com))

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

I first met Jimbo Wales, the face of Wikipedia, when he came to speak at
Stanford. Wales told us about Wikipedia’s history, technology, and
culture, but one thing he said stands out. “The idea that a lot of
people have of Wikipedia,” he noted, “is that it’s some emergent
phenomenon — the wisdom of mobs, swarm intelligence, that sort of thing
— thousands and thousands of individual users each adding a little bit
of content and out of this emerges a coherent body of
work.”[†](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia_fn1) But, he
insisted, the truth was rather different: Wikipedia was actually written
by “a community … a dedicated group of a few hundred volunteers” where
“I know all of them and they all know each other”. Really, “it’s much
like any traditional organization.”

The difference, of course, is crucial. Not just for the public, who
wants to know how a grand thing like Wikipedia actually gets written,
but also for Wales, who wants to know how to run the site. “For me this
is really important, because I spend a lot of time listening to those
four or five hundred and if … those people were just a bunch of people
talking … maybe I can just safely ignore them when setting policy” and
instead worry about “the million people writing a sentence each”.

So did the Gang of 500 actually write Wikipedia? Wales decided to run a
simple study to find out: he counted who made the most edits to the
site. “I expected to find something like an 80-20 rule: 80% of the work
being done by 20% of the users, just because that seems to come up a
lot. But it’s actually much, much tighter than that: it turns out over
50% of all the edits are done by just .7% of the users … 524 people. …
And in fact the most active 2%, which is 1400 people, have done 73.4% of
all the edits.” The remaining 25% of edits, he said, were from “people
who [are] contributing … a minor change of a fact or a minor spelling
fix … or something like that.”

Stanford wasn’t the only place he’s made such a claim; it’s part of the
standard talk he gives all over the world. “This is the group of around
a thousand people who really matter”, he told us at Stanford. “There is
this tight community that is actually doing the bulk of all the
editing”, he explained at the Oxford Internet Institute. “It’s a group
of around a thousand to two thousand people,” he informed the crowd at
GEL 2005. These are just the three talks I watched, but Wales has given
hundreds more like them.

At Stanford the students were skeptical. Wales was just counting the
number of edits — the number of times a user changed something and
clicked save. Wouldn’t things be different if he counted the amount of
text each user contributed? Wales said he planned to do that in “the
next revision”, but was sure “my results are going to be even stronger”,
because he’d no longer be counting vandalism and other changes that
later got removed.

Wales presents these claims as comforting. Don’t worry, he tells the
world, Wikipedia isn’t as shocking as you think. In fact, it’s just like
any other project: a small group of colleagues working together toward a
common goal. But if you think about it, Wales’s view of things is
actually much *more* shocking: around a thousand people wrote the
world’s largest encyclopedia in four years for free? Could this really
be true?

* * * * *

Curious and skeptical, I decided to investigate. I picked an article at
random (“Alan Alda”) to see how it was written. [Today the Alan Alda
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alan_Alda&oldid=72331810)
is a pretty standard Wikipedia page: it has a couple photos, several
pages of facts and background, and a handful of links. But [when it was
first
created](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alan_Alda&oldid=234091),
it was just two sentences: “Alan Alda is a male actor most famous for
his role of Hawkeye Pierce in the television series MASH. Or recent
work, he plays sensitive male characters in drama movies.” How did it
get from there to here?

Edit by edit, I watched the page evolve. The changes I saw largely fell
into three groups. A tiny handful — probably around 5 out of nearly 400
— were “vandalism”: confused or malicious people adding things that
simply didn’t fit, followed by someone undoing their change. The vast
majority, by far, were small changes: people fixing typos, formatting,
links, categories, and so on, making the article a little nicer but not
adding much in the way of substance. Finally, a much smaller amount were
genuine additions: a couple sentences or even paragraphs of new
information added to the page.

Wales seems to think that the vast majority of users are just doing the
first two (vandalizing or contributing small fixes) while the core group
of Wikipedians writes the actual bulk of the article. But that’s not at
all what I found. Almost every time I saw a substantive edit, I found
the user who had contributed it was not an active user of the site. They
generally had made less than 50 edits (typically around 10), usually on
related pages. Most never even bothered to create an account.

* * * * *

To investigate more formally, I purchased some time on a computer
cluster and downloaded a copy of the Wikipedia archives. I wrote a
little program to go through each edit and count how much of it remained
in the latest
version.[†](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia_fn2) Instead of
counting edits, as Wales did, I counted the number of letters a user
actually contributed to the present article.

If you just count edits, it appears the biggest contributors to the Alan
Alda article (7 of the top 10) are registered users who (all but 2) have
made thousands of edits to the site. Indeed, \#4 has made over 7,000
edits while \#7 has over 25,000. In other words, if you use Wales’s
methods, you get Wales’s results: most of the content seems to be
written by heavy editors.

But when you count letters, the picture dramatically changes: few of the
contributors (2 out of the top 10) are even registered and most (6 out
of the top 10) have made less than 25 edits to the entire site. In fact,
\#9 has made exactly one edit — this one! With the more reasonable
metric — indeed, the one Wales himself said he planned to use in the
next revision of his study — the result completely reverses.

I don’t have the resources to run this calculation across all of
Wikipedia (there are over 60 million edits!), but I ran it on several
more randomly-selected articles and the results were much the same. For
example, the largest portion of the Anaconda article was written by a
user who only made 2 edits to it (and only 100 on the entire site). By
contrast, the largest number of edits were made by a user who appears to
have contributed no text to the final article (the edits were all
deleting things and moving things around).

* * * * *

When you put it all together, the story become clear: an outsider makes
one edit to add a chunk of information, then insiders make several edits
tweaking and reformatting it. In addition, insiders rack up thousands of
edits doing things like changing the name of a category across the
entire site — the kind of thing only insiders deeply care about. As a
result, insiders account for the vast majority of the edits. But it’s
the outsiders who provide nearly all of the content.

And when you think about it, this makes perfect sense. Writing an
encyclopedia is hard. To do anywhere near a decent job, you have to know
a great deal of information about an incredibly wide variety of
subjects. Writing so much text is difficult, but doing all the
background research seems impossible.

On the other hand, everyone has a bunch of obscure things that, for one
reason or another, they’ve come to know well. So they share them,
clicking the edit link and adding a paragraph or two to Wikipedia. At
the same time, a small number of people have become particularly
involved in Wikipedia itself, learning its policies and special syntax,
and spending their time tweaking the contributions of everybody else.

Other encyclopedias work similarly, just on a much smaller scale: a
large group of people write articles on topics they know well, while a
small staff formats them into a single work. This second group is
clearly very important — it’s thanks to them encyclopedias have a
consistent look and tone — but it’s a severe exaggeration to say that
they wrote the encyclopedia. One imagines the people running
*Britannica* worry more about their contributors than their formatters.

And Wikipedia should too. Even if all the formatters quit the project
tomorrow, Wikipedia would still be immensely valuable. For the most
part, people read Wikipedia because it has the information they need,
not because it has a consistent look. It certainly wouldn’t be as nice
without one, but the people who (like me) care about such things would
probably step up to take the place of those who had left. The formatters
aid the contributors, not the other way around.

* * * * *

Wales is right about one thing, though. This fact does have enormous
policy implications. If Wikipedia is written by occasional contributors,
then growing it requires making it easier and more rewarding to
contribute occasionally. Instead of trying to squeeze more work out of
those who spend their life on Wikipedia, we need to broaden the base of
those who contribute just a little bit.

Unfortunately, precisely because such people are only occasional
contributors, their opinions aren’t heard by the current Wikipedia
process. They don’t get involved in policy debates, they don’t go to
meetups, and they don’t hang out with Jimbo Wales. And so things that
might help them get pushed on the backburner, assuming they’re even
proposed.

Out of sight is out of mind, so it’s a short hop to thinking these
invisible people aren’t particularly important. Thus Wales’s belief that
500 people wrote half an encyclopedia. Thus his assumption that
outsiders contribute mostly vandalism and nonsense. And thus the
comments you sometimes hear that making it hard to edit the site might
be a good thing.

“I’m not a wiki person who happened to go into encyclopedias,” Wales
told the crowd at Oxford. “I’m an encyclopedia person who happened to
use a wiki.” So perhaps his belief that Wikipedia was written in the
traditional way isn’t surprising. Unfortunately, it is dangerous. If
Wikipedia continues down this path of focusing on the encyclopedia at
the expense of the wiki, it might end up not being much of either.

**More:** [Further
reading](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election/FAQ) | [Vote
for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election) | [Discuss
on
Meta-Wiki](http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Talk:Who_Writes_Wikipedia%3F)
| [Discuss on
Reddit](http://reddit.com/submit?url=http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)

**Follow ups:** [Summary of further
research](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/writefp), [summary of
responses](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments).

**Additional information:** [my collection of research on this
question](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/whowriteswikipedia/).


Who Writes Wikipedia? — Responses
=================================

September 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments)

* * * * *

([back to Who writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia))

First, on a personal note, let me simply say thanks. I probably put more
work yesterday’s post than anything else I’ve ever written. In addition
to the research I describe, I’ve spent my free time the past few weeks
going over the text of the article again and again, agonizing about the
proper phrasing, getting everything just right. It was definitely worth
it. My sincere thanks to everyone who made it possible.

Further research is needed
--------------------------

Getting down to business, many are interested in pursuing this line of
quantitative research. The work I did was intended for an article, not a
formal paper, and while I’m fairly confident the basic principles are
correct there’s plenty more work to be done.

I was heartened to discover research by Seth Anthony which,
independently and more formally, came to largely the same conclusions.
[As he explained on Reddit](http://reddit.com/info/g9si/comments/cgc62):
“Only about 10% of all edits on Wikipedia actually add substantive
content. Roughly a third of those edits are made by someone without an
account, half of someone without a userpage (a minimal threshhold for
considering whether someone is part of the “community”). The average
content-adder has less than 200 edits: much less, in many cases.”

One of the more interesting things Anthony did was look at the work of
admins in detail. In his sample, he noticed that none of the genuinely
substantive edits were done by official site admins. He found that when
admins originally joined the site, they contributed a lot less
frequently and consistently but created a lot more substantive content.
After they became admins, however, they turned into what Anthony calls
“janitors”.

One of the wonderful things about Wikipedia is that literally all of the
data — every single edit and practically every discussion made on or
about the site — is easily available. So there’s an enormous amount more
to learn about how it gets written. (In addition to nailing down what we
know so far a little better.) If you’re interested to contributing to
further research on this and related topics, [send me an
email](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) and I’ll try to coordinate something.

Who gets to vote?
-----------------

Another response was to think about the implications on who gets to vote
in Wikipedia elections. ‘I tried to vote,’ [commented
Eric](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c3), ‘but since I
am one of your “occasional contributors” (I’ve edited only one article
to make content changes), I am not eligible[]. It appears that the
opinions of “occasional contributors” will not be heard.’ Others,
including William Loughborough and Jason Clark, expressed similar
sentiments. ‘HURRAH, I am DISENFRANCHISED’, [complained Bill
Coderre](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c29).

Alienating the world
--------------------

But by far the most common response was people sharing their experience
trying to contribute to Wikipedia, only to see their contributions be
quickly reverted or rewritten.

‘You can definately tell the “regulars” on Wikipedia’, [joshd
noted](http://reddit.com/info/g9si/comments/cga0i). ‘They’re the ones
who … delete your newly reate[d] article without hesitation, or revert
your changes and accuse you of vandalis[m] without even checking the
changes you made.’ ‘Every modification I made was deleted without any
comment’, [complained
CafeCafe](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c17). ‘I know
there are a lot of people like me willing to help, but unless there is a
real discussion behind, I won’t waste my time to help anymore which is a
sad thing.’

[bowerbird
complained](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c17) that
‘my contributions … have been warped by people who merely want to “make
it sound like an encyclopedia” without having any knowledge of the
topic’ [while Ian](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c19)
‘got fed up of the self-appointed officious jobsworths who [rewrite
your] things [to] fit “their vision” … . My time is too valuable to
argue with these people…’

[Bill Coderre
told](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c29) of how he
wrote entire articles from scratch, only to see them ruined ‘by some
super-editors, who removed content, and turned what I thought was
gosh-darn good writing into crap. … These people, by and large, “edited”
thousands of articles. In most cases, these edits were to remove
material that they found unsuitable. Indeed, some of the people-history
pages contained little “awards” that people gave each other — for
removing content from Wikipedia.’

And it seems like half of all the people I meet have a story about being
listed for deletion and the nasty insults that ensued. Seriously, there
have been numerous times I’ve said something about Wikipedia to a
relatively well-known person and they responded back with a story about
how someone insulted and deleted them. ‘[T]here are culture vultures
overlooking Wkidpedia waiting to kill anything that doesn’t fit the
norm’, [wrote
Mediangler](http://www.mediangler.com/2006/09/04/who-writes-wikipedia-but-where-do-you-go-for-this-data-european-web-20-again-chuquet/).

Why does this matter? Why should we listen to the angry complaints of
random people on the Internet? If occasional contributors are the
lifeblood of Wikipedia, as the evidence suggests, then alienating such
people just can’t be healthy for the project. As Ian wrote, ‘if we are
to invest our valuable time contributing some expert knowledge on some
subject, we want to know that our work will remain there for others, and
not just keep getting reverted out in seconds by some control freak that
knows nothing about the actual subject. … your article proves the
exist[e]nce of this “inner gang” that I feel are actually holding
Wikipedia back. To allow Wikipedia to grow and really pick the brains of
the experts around the world, you need to do something to break up this
inner gang and the mini empires they are building for themselves.’

Perhaps we can improve things with new rules (not only should you [not
bite the newcomers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:BITE), you shouldn’t
even bark at them) and new software (making it easier to discuss changes
and defend contributions), but most importantly, it’s going to require a
cultural shift. Larry Sanger famously suggested that [Wikipedia must
jettison its
anti-elitism](http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2004/12/30/142458/25) so
that experts could feel more comfortable contributing. I think the real
solution is the opposite: Wikipedians must jettison their *elitism* and
welcome the newbie masses as genuine contributors to the project, as
people to respect, not filter out.


False Outliers
==============

September 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/writefp)

* * * * *

So far [my Wikipedia
script](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia) has churned
through about 200 articles, calculating who wrote what in each. This
morning I looked through them to see if there were any that didn’t match
my theory. It printed out a couple and I decided to investigate.

The first it found was [Alkane](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alkane), a
long technical article about acyclic saturated hydrocarbons that it said
was largely written by
[Physchim62](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Physchim62). Yesterday a
good friend was telling me that he thought long technical articles were
likely written by a single person, so I immediately thought that here
was the proof that he was right. But, just to check, I decided to look
in the edit history to make sure my script hadn’t made an error.

It hadn’t, I found, but once again simply looking at the numbers missed
the larger point. Physchim62 had indeed contributed most of the article,
but according to the edit comments, it was by translating the German
version! I don’t have the German data, but presumably it was written in
the same incremental way as most of the articles in my study.

The next serious case was [Characters in Atlas
Shrugged](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Characters_in_Atlas_Shrugged),
which the script said was written by CatherineMunro. Again, it seemed
plausible that one person could have written all those character bios.
But again, an investigation into the actual edit history found that
Munro hadn’t written them, instead she’d copied them from a bunch of
subpages, merging them into one bigger page.

The final serious example was [Anchorage,
Alaska](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchorage%2C_Alaska), which
appeared to have been written by
[JeffreyAllen1975](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:JeffreyAllen1975).
Here the contributions seemed quite genuine; JeffreyAllen1975 made tons
of edits each contributing a paragraph at a time. The work seemed to
take quite a toll on him; at his user page he noted “I just got
burned-out and tired of the online encyclopedia. My time is being taken
away from me by being with Wikipedia.” He lasted about four months.

Still, something seemed fishy about JeffreyAllen1975, so I decided to
investigate further. Currently, the Anchorage page has a tag noting that
“The current version of the article or section reads like an
advertisement.” A bit of Googling revealed why: JeffreyAllen1975’s
contributions had been copied-and-pasted from other websites, like [the
Anchorage Chamber of
Commerce](http://www.anchoragechamber.org/info/relocation.htm)
(“Anchorage’s public school system is ranked among the best in the
nation. … The district’s average SAT and ACT College entrance exam
scores are consistently above the national average and Advanced
Placement courses are offered at each of the district’s larger high
schools.”).

I suspect JeffreyAllen1975 didn’t know what he was doing; his writing
style suggests he’s just a kid: “In my free time, I am very proud of
my-self by how much I’ve learned by making good edits on Wikipedia
articles.” I’m pretty sure he just thought he was helping the project:
“Wikipedia is like the real encyclopedia books (A thru Z) that you see
in the library, but better.” But his plagiarism will still have to be
removed.

When I started, just looking at the numbers these seemed to be several
cases that strongly contradicted my theory. And had I just stuck to
looking at the numbers, I would have believed that to be the case as
well. But, once again, investigation shows the picture to be far more
interesting: translation, reorganization, and plagiarism. Exciting
stuff!


Who Runs Wikipedia?
===================

September 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: **Who Runs Wikipedia?**\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

**Translations:**
[日本語](http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Masao/WhoRunsWikipedia)
([add](mailto:me@aaronsw.com))

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

During Wikimania, I gave a short talk proposing some new features for
Wikipedia. The audience, which consisted mostly of programmers and other
high-level Wikipedians, immediately begun suggesting problems with the
idea. “Won’t bad thing X happen?” “How will you prevent Y?” “Do you
really think people are going to do Z?” For a while I tried to answer
them, explaining technical ways to fix the problem, but after a couple
rounds I finally said:

> Stop.
>
> If I had come here five years ago and told you I was going to make an
> entire encyclopedia by putting up a bunch of web pages that anyone
> could edit, you would have been able to raise a thousand objections:
> It will get filled with vandalism! The content will be unreliable! No
> one will do that work for free!
>
> And you would have been right to. These were completely reasonable
> expectations at the time. But here’s the funny thing: it worked
> anyway.

At the time, I was just happy this quieted them down. But later I
started thinking more about it. Why did Wikipedia work anyway?

It wasn’t because its programmers were so far-sighted that the software
solved all the problems. And it wasn’t because the people running it put
clear rules in place to prevent misbehavior. We know this because when
Wikipedia started it didn’t have any programmers (it used off-the-shelf
wiki software) and it didn’t have clear rules (one of the first major
rules was apparently [Ignore all
rules](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Ignore_all_rules)).

No, the reason Wikipedia works is because of the community, a group of
people that took the project as their own and threw themselves into
making it succeed.

* * * * *

People are constantly trying to vandalize Wikipedia, replacing articles
with random text. It doesn’t work; their edits are undone within
minutes, even seconds. But why? It’s not magic — it’s a bunch of
incredibly dedicated people who sit at their computers watching every
change that gets made. These days they call themselves the “recent
changes patrol” and have special software that makes it easy to undo bad
changes and block malicious users with a couple clicks.

Why does anyone do such a thing? It’s not particularly fascinating work,
they’re not being paid to do it, and nobody in charge asked them to
volunteer. They do it because they care about the site enough to feel
responsible. They get upset when someone tries to mess it up.

It’s hard to imagine anyone feeling this way about *Britannica*. There
are people who love that encyclopedia, but have any of them shown up at
their offices offering to help out? It’s hard even to imagine. Average
people just don’t feel responsible for *Britannica*; there are
professionals to do that.

* * * * *

Everybody knows Wikipedia as the site anyone can edit. The article about
tree frogs wasn’t written because someone in charge decided they needed
one and assigned it to someone; it was written because someone,
somewhere just went ahead and started writing it. And a chorus of others
decided to help out.

But what’s less well-known is that it’s also the site that anyone can
run. The vandals aren’t stopped because someone is in charge of stopping
them; it was simply something people started doing. And it’s not just
vandalism: a “welcoming committee” says hi to every new user, a “cleanup
taskforce” goes around doing factchecking. The site’s rules are made by
rough consensus. Even the servers are largely run this way — a group of
volunteer sysadmins hang out on IRC, keeping an eye on things. Until
quite recently, the Foundation that supposedly runs Wikipedia had no
actual employees.

This is so unusual, we don’t even have a word for it. It’s tempting to
say “democracy”, but that’s woefully inadequate. Wikipedia doesn’t hold
a vote and elect someone to be in charge of vandal-fighting. Indeed,
“Wikipedia” doesn’t do anything at all. Someone simply sees that there
are vandals to be fought and steps up to do the job.

* * * * *

This is so radically different that it’s tempting to see it as a
mistake: Sure, perhaps things have worked so far on this model, but when
the real problems hit, things are going to have to change: certain
people must have clear authority, important tasks must be carefully
assigned, everyone else must understand that they are simply volunteers.

But Wikipedia’s openness isn’t a mistake; it’s the source of its
success. A dedicated community solves problems that official leaders
wouldn’t even know were there. Meanwhile, their volunteerism largely
eliminates infighting about who gets to be what. Instead, tasks get done
by the people who genuinely want to do them, who just happen to be the
people who care enough to do them right.

Wikipedia’s biggest problems have come when it’s strayed from this path,
when it’s given some people official titles and specified tasks.
Whenever that happens, real work slows down and squabbling speeds up.
But it’s an easy mistake to make, so it gets made again and again.

* * * * *

Of course, that’s not the only reason this mistake is made, it’s just
the most polite. The more frightening problem is that people love to get
power and hate to give it up. Especially with a project as big and
important as Wikipedia, with the constant swarm of praise and attention,
it takes tremendous strength to turn down the opportunity to be its
official X, to say instead “it’s a community project, I’m just another
community member”.

Indeed, the opposite is far more common. People who have poured vast
amounts of time into the project begin to feel they should be getting
something in return. They insist that, with all their work, they
*deserve* an official job or a special title. After all, won’t clearly
assigning tasks be better for everyone?

And so, the trend is clear: more power, more people, more problems. It’s
not just a series of mistakes, it’s the tendency of the system.

* * * * *

It would be absurd for me to say that I’m immune to such pressures.
After all, I’m currently running for a seat on the Wikimedia Board. But
I also lie awake at night worrying that I might abuse my power.

A systemic tendency like this is not going to be solved by electing the
right person to the right place and then going to back to sleep while
they solve the problem. If the community wants to remain in charge, it’s
going to have to fight for it. I’m writing these essays to help people
understand that this is something worth fighting for. And if I’m elected
to the Board, I plan to keep on writing.

Just as Wikipedia’s success as an encyclopedia requires a world of
volunteers to write it, Wikipedia’s success as an organization requires
the community of volunteers to run it. On the one hand, this means
opening up the Board’s inner workings for the community to see and get
involved in. But it also means opening up the actions of the community
so the wider world can get involved. Whoever wins this next election, I
hope we all take on this task.


Making More Wikipedians
=======================

September 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: **Making More Wikipedians**\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Wikipedia, the Vice President of the *World Book* told us, is now
recognized by ten percent of Americans. He presented this in a tone of
congratulation: with no marketing budget or formal organization, a free
online-only encyclopedia written by volunteers had achieved a vast
amount of attention. But I took it a different way. “Only ten percent?”
I thought. “That means we have ninety percent to go!”

Wikipedia is one of the few things that pretty much everyone finds
useful. So how do we get all of them to use it? The first task, it
appears, is telling them it exists. An ad campaign or PR blitz doesn’t
quite seem appropriate for the job, though. Instead, our promotion
should work the same way way the rest of Wikipedia works: let the
community do it.

Wikipedia’s users come from all over society: different cultures,
different countries, different places, different fields of study. The
physics grad students who contribute heavily to physics articles are in
a much better position to promote it to physicists than a promotional
flack from the head office. The Pokemon fan maintaining the Pokemon
articles probably knows how to reach other Pokemaniacs than any
marketing expert.

Sure, you might say, but isn’t the whole question of marketing Wikipedia
somewhat silly? After all, you obviously know about Wikipedia, and your
friends probably all seem to as well. But things are a lot thinner than
you might expect: as noted above, only one in ten Americans even knows
what Wikipedia is, and most of those don’t truly understand it.

It’s shocking to discover how even smart, technically-minded people
can’t figure out how to actually edit Wikipedia. Dave Winer wrote some
of the first software to have an “Edit This Page” button (indeed, he
operated editthispage.com for many years) and yet he at first complained
that he couldn’t figure out how to edit a page on Wikipedia. Michael
Arrington reviews advanced Web 2.0 websites daily, yet [he
noted](http://www.techcrunch.com/2005/07/12/profile-wikipedia/) that
“Many people don’t realize how easy it is for anyone to add content to
wikipedia (I’ve done it several times)”. If prominent technologists have
trouble, imagine the rest of the world.

Obviously, this has implications for the software side: we need to work
hard on making Wikipedia’s interface clearer and more usable. But
there’s also a task here for the community: giving talks and tutorials
to groups that you know about, explaining the core ideas behind
Wikipedia, and giving demonstrations of how to get involved in it. The
best interface in the world is no substitute for real instruction and
even the clearest document explaining our principles will be ignored in
a way that a personal presentation won’t.

But beyond simply giving people the ability to contribute, we need to
work to make contributing more rewarding. [As I previously
noted](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments), many people decide
to dive into writing for Wikipedia, only to watch their contributions be
summarily reverted. Many people create a new article, only to see it get
deleted after an AfD discussion where random Wikipedians try to think up
negative things to say about it. For someone who thought they were
donating their time to help the project, neither response is
particularly encouraging.

I’m not saying that we should change our policies or automatically keep
everything a newcomer decides to add so we don’t hurt their feelings.
But we do need to think more about how to enforce policies without
turning valuable newcomers away, how we can educate them instead of
alienating them.

At Wikimania, no less an authority than Richard Stallman (who himself
long ago [suggested the idea](http://www.gnu.org/encyclopedia/) of a
free online encyclopedia) wandered around the conference complaining
about a problem he’d discovered with a particular Wikipedia article. He
could try to fix it himself, he noted, but it would take an enormous
amount of his time and the word would probably just get reverted. He’s
not the only one — I constantly hear tales from experts about problems
they encounter on Wikipedia, but are too complicated for them to fix
alone. What if we could collect these complaints on the site, instead of
having these people make them at parties?

One way to do that would be to have some sort of complaint-tracking
system for articles, like the discussion system of talk pages. Instead
of simply complaining about an article in public, Stallman could follow
a link from it to file a complaint. The complaint would be tracked and
stored with the article. More dedicated Wikipedians would go through the
list of complaints, trying to address them and letting the submitter
know when they were done. Things like POV allegations could be handled
in a similar way: a notice saying neutrality was disputed could appear
on the top of the page until the complaint was properly closed.

This is just one idea, of course, but it’s an example of the kinds of
things we need to think about. Wikipedia is visited by millions each
day; how do get them to contribute back their thoughts on the article
instead of muttering them under their breath or airing them to their
friends?


Making More Wikipedias
======================

September 14, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: **Making More Wikipedias**\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Maybe it’s just me, but it seems like everywhere you look people are
trying to get a piece of Wikipedia. Wikis sites have been started in
every field from [the Muppets](http://muppet.wikia.com/wiki/Muppet_Wiki)
to [the law](http://lii.law.cornell.edu/wex/index.php/Main_Page). The
domain Wiki.com recently was [sold for 3 million
dollars](http://www.wired.com/news/technology/internet/0,71591-0.html?tw=wn_technology_1).
Professor Cass Sunstein, [previously
seen](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691095892) arguing the Internet could
tear apart the republic, just published [a new
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195189280) arguing tools like wikis
will lead us to “Infotopia”. So is it possible to replicate Wikipedia’s
success? What’s the key that made it work?

Unfortunately, this question hasn’t gotten the attention it deserves.
For the most part, people have simply assumed that Wikipedia is as
simple as the name suggests: install some wiki software, say that it’s
for writing an encyclopedia, and *voila!* — problem solved. But as
pretty much everyone who has tried has discovered, it isn’t as simple as
that.

Technology industry people tend to reduce web sites down to their
technology: [Wikipedia](http://wikipedia.org/) is simply an instance of
wiki software, [DailyKos](http://www.dailykos.com/) just blog software,
and [Reddit](http://reddit.com/) just voting software. But these sites
aren’t just installations of software, there also communities of people.

Building a community is pretty tough; it requires just the right
combination of technology and rules and people. And while it’s been
clear that communities are at the core of many of the most interesting
things on the Internet, we’re still at the very early stages of
understanding what it is that makes them work.

But Wikipedia isn’t even a typical community. Usually Internet
communities are groups of people who come together to discuss something,
like cryptography or the writing of a technical specification. Perhaps
they meet in an IRC channel, a web forum, a newsgroup, or on a mailing
list, but the focus is always something “out there”, something outside
the discussion itself.

But with Wikipedia, the goal is building Wikipedia. It’s not a community
set up to make some other thing, it’s a community set up to make itself.
And since Wikipedia was one of the first sites to do it, we know hardly
anything about building communities like that.

Indeed, we know hardly anything about building software for that. Wiki
software has been around for years — the first wiki was launched in
1995; Wikipedia wasn’t started until 2001 — but it was always used like
any other community, for discussing something else. It wasn’t generally
used for building wikis in themselves; indeed, it wasn’t very good at
doing that.

Wikipedia’s real innovation was much more than simply starting a
community to build an encyclopedia or using wiki software to do it.
Wikipedia’s real innovation was the idea of radical collaboration.
Instead of having a small group of people work together, it invited the
entire world to take part. Instead of assigning tasks, it let anyone
work on whatever they wanted, whenever they felt like it. Instead of
having someone be in charge, it let people sort things out for
themselves. And yet it did all this towards creating a very specific
product.

Even now, it’s hard to think of anything else quite like it. Books have
been co-authored, but usually only by two people. Large groups have
written encyclopedias, but usually only by being assigned tasks.
Software has been written by communities, but typically someone is in
charge.

But if we take this definition, rather than wiki software, as the core
of Wikipedia, then we see that other types of software are also forms of
radical collaboration. Reddit, for example, is radical collaboration to
build a news site: anyone can add or edit, nobody is in charge, and yet
an interesting news site results. Freed from the notion that Wikipedia
is simply about wiki software, one can even imagine new kinds of sites.
What about a “debate wiki”, where people argue about a question, but the
outcome is a carefully-constructed discussion for others to read later,
rather than a morass of bickering messages.

If we take radical collaboration as our core, then it becomes clear that
extending Wikipedia’s success doesn’t simply mean installing more copies
of wiki software for different tasks. It means figuring out the key
principles that make radical collaboration work. What kinds of projects
is it good for? How do you get them started? How do you keep them
growing? What rules do you put in place? What software do you use?

These questions can’t be answered from the armchair, of course. They
require experimentation and study. And that, in turn, requires building
a community around strong collaboration itself. It doesn’t help us much
if each person goes off and tries to start a wiki on their own. To learn
what works and what doesn’t, we need to share our experiences and be
willing to test new things — new goals, new social structures, new
software.


Code, and Other Laws of Wikipedia
=================================

September 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: **Code, and Other Laws**\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Code is law, Lawrence Lessig famously said years ago, and time has not
robbed the idea of any of its force. The point, so eloquently defended
in his book *Code, and Other Laws of Cyberspace*, is that in the worlds
created by software, the design of the software regulates behavior just
as strongly as any formal law does; more effectively, in fact.

The point is obvious in some contexts. In the online 3D universe of
Second Life, if the software prevents you from typing a certain word,
that’s a far more effective restraint on speech in that world than any
US law could ever be in ours. But the point is far more subtle than
that; it applies with equal force to the world of Wikipedia, the
thriving community and culture that our wiki software creates.

For one thing, the software decides who gets to be part of the
community. If using it is clear and simple, then lots of people can use
it. But, if it’s complicated, then only those who take the time to learn
it are able to take part. And, as we’ve seen, lots of intelligent people
don’t even understand how to edit Wikipedia, let alone do any of the
other things on the site.

For another, the software decides how the community operates. Features
like administrative controls privilege some users over others. Support
for things like stable revisions decide what sorts of things get
published. The structure of talk pages help decide what and how things
get discussed.

The page design the site uses encourages specific actions by making some
links clear and prominent. Software functions like categories make
certain kinds of features possible. The formatting codes used for things
like infoboxes and links determine how easy it is for newcomers to edit
those pieces of the site.

All of these things are political choices, not technical ones. It’s not
like there’s a right answer that’s obvious to any intelligent
programmer. And these choices can have huge effects on the community.
That’s why it’s essential the community be involved in making these
decisions.

The current team of Wikipedia programmers is a volunteer group (although
a couple of them were recently hired by the Wikimedia Foundation so they
could live a little more comfortably) working much like a standard free
software community, discussing things on mailing lists and IRC channels.
They got together in person in the days before Wikimania to discuss some
of the current hot topics in the software.

One presentation was by a usability expert who told us about a study
done on how hard people found it to add a photo to a Wikipedia page. The
discussion after the presentation turned into a debate over *whether*
Wikipedia should be easy to to use. Some suggested that confused users
should just add their contributions in the wrong way and a more
experienced users would come along to clean their contributions up.
Others questioned whether confused users should be allowed to edit the
site at all — [were their contributions even
valuable?](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)

As a programmer, I have a great deal of respect for the members of my
trade. But with all due respect, are these really decisions that the
programmers should be making?

Meanwhile, Jimbo Wales also has a for-profit company, Wikia, which
recently received \$4 million in venture capital funding. Wales has
said, including in his keynote speech at Wikimania, that one of the
things he hopes to spend it on is hiring programmers to improve the
Wikipedia software.

This is the kind of thing that seems like a thoughtful gesture if you
think of the software as neutral — after all, improvements are
improvements — but becomes rather more problematic if technical choices
have political effects. Should executives and venture capitalists be
calling the shots on some of these issues?

The Wikipedia community is enormously vibrant and I have no doubt that
the site will manage to survive many software changes. But if we’re
concerned about more than mere survival, about how to make Wikipedia the
best that it can be, we need to start thinking about software design as
much as we think about the rest of our policy choices.


(The Dandy Warhols) Come Down
=============================

September 22, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/comedown)

* * * * *

Well, the Wikipedia election has finally ended. The good news is that I
can now talk about other things again. (For example, did you know that
Erik Möller eats babies?) I have a backlog of about 20 posts that I
built up over the course of the election. But instead of springing them
on you all at once, I’ll try to do daily posting again starting Monday.
(Oooh.)

The actual results haven’t been announced yet (and probably won’t be for
another couple days, while they check the list of voters for people who
voted twice) but my impression is that I probably lost. Many wags have
commented on how my campaign was almost destined to lose: I argued that
the hard-core Wikipedia contributors weren’t very important, but those
were precisely the people who could vote for me — in other words, I
alienated my only constituency.

“[Aaron Swartz: Why is he getting so much
attention?](http://nonbovine-ruminations.blogspot.com/2006/09/aaron-swartz-why-is-he-getting-so-much.html)”
wrote fellow candidate Kelly Martin. “The community has long known that
edit count is a poor measure of contributions”. Others, meanwhile,
insisted my claims were so obviously wrong as to not be even worth
discussing.

Jimbo Wales, on the other hand, finally sent me a nice message the other
day letting me know that he’d removed the offending section from his
talk and looked forward to sitting down with me and investigating the
topic more carefully.

And for my part, I hope to be able to take up some of the offers I’ve
received for computer time and run my algorithm across all of Wikipedia
and publish the results in more detailed form. (I’d also like to use the
results to put up a little website where you can type in the name of a
page and see who wrote what, color-coded or something like that.)

As for the election itself, it’s much harder to draw firm conclusions.
It’s difficult in any election, this one even more so because we have so
little data — no exit polls or phone surveys or even TV pundits to rely
upon. Still, I’m fairly content seeing the kind words of all the
incredible people I respect. Their support means a great deal to me.

The same is true of the old friends who wrote in during my essays along
with all the new people who encouraged me to keep on writing. Writing
the essays on a regular schedule was hard work — at one point, after
sleeping overnight at my mother’s bedside in the hospital, I trundled
down at seven in the morning to find an Internet connection so I could
write and post one — but your support made it worth the effort.

I hope that whoever wins takes what I’ve written into consideration. I’m
not sure who that is yet, but there are some hints. I was reading an
irreverent site critical of Wikipedia when I came across its claim that
Jimbo Wales had sent an email to the Wikipedia community telling them
who they should vote for. I assumed the site had simply made it up to
attack Jimbo, but when I searched I found [it really was
genuine](http://mail.wikipedia.org/pipermail/foundation-l/2006-September/009964.html):

> I personally strongly strongly support the candidacies of Oscar and
> Mindspillage.
>
> […]
>
> There are other candidates, some good, but at least some of them are
> entirely unacceptable because they have proven themselves repeatedly
> unable to work well with the community.

For those reading the tea leaves, this suggests that the results will be
something like: Eloquence, Oscar, Mindspillage. But we’ll see.

The let-down after the election is probably not the best time to make
plans but, if I had to, I’d probably decide to stay out of Wikipedia
business for a while. It’s a great and important project, but not the
one for me.

Anyway, now everyone can [go back to vandalizing my Wikipedia
page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz). Laters.


Weekend Update
==============

September 24, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/comedown2)

* * * * *

[I lost.](http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Election_results_2006)


of the MBTA
===========

September 25, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ofthembta)

* * * * *

It was night, and Central Square was largely empty. A few cars drove
down the street, a few guys loitered outside the bars, a few lights were
on in windows, but the city was quietly shutting down. I walked down the
steps into the subway, paid my fare, and began looking for a place to
sit and read.

I found a bench, another kid sitting at the opposite side, and took my
seat. “Spare a dollar?” the kid asked. “Sorry,” I said, “spent
everything I have to get in here.” “Man, wish I had five bucks,” he
said. “If I had that I’d be out there grabbing a meal. I haven’t eaten
in like two days.”

I tried to read my book but he wanted to talk. “You just come back from
school?” he asked. “No,” I said, “I was visiting a friend.” “Oh, I
thought you were at school ‘cause of the book.” “Oh, I’ve been carrying
this around all day,” I said. “What is it?” he asked. “It’s a book about
books,” I said. He laughed. “I thought it was a bible or something.”

“You heading to Alewife?” I asked. “No,” he said, laughing. “I’m staying
right here.” I blinked twice and began to realize what he meant. He
wasn’t asking for money because he’d been out all night and spent the
cash his parents gave him. He was asking for money because he was
homeless. And with fits and starts, he told me a little of his story as
I waited for the train.

He grew up with his family in New Hampshire. They were “rich” then, at
least by comparison, lived in a real “mansion”. Inspectors started
coming around to check out the house, three in one month. Finally a man
came to tell them the bad news. “You have to move out,” he said. “The
house is infested with termites; it’ll collapse within months.” “What
are you talking about?” his mom responded. “This place is fine;
inspectors have been looking it all over.” The man picked up a large
hammer, lifted it above his head and struck a mighty blow — at the wall.
The drywall broke away to reveal termites filling the insides, eating
away at the wood.

They had to leave fast, didn’t even have time to pack stuff. The
bulldozers came the next day, turned the whole thing into rubble. They
also bulldozed his mom’s car, where she kept all the money. They were
homeless and penniless. The Department of Social Services picked up his
five-year-old brother, insisted on \$100 fee if they wanted to regain
custody. “If I had that kind of money,” he explained, “I’d be eating
with it.”

So he decided to start hitchhiking, head to Cambridge where he had some
family. Caught a ride in the back of a UPS truck, then after that
dropped him off, waited for another hour or two in the middle of nowhere
before he could find someone else. Finally he found his way to part of
the Boston subway system, where he managed to sneak his way through the
turnstiles. Now he could ride all around town, get to Cambridge, where
he set up base in Central Square.

“Mostly I just sit here,” he explained. “Sometimes I just ride the
trains all day, Braintree to Alewife and back. Found a violin some guy
had lost — hey, I’m homeless and you’re not — and started playing it for
money, but the cops picked me up for performing without a license and
threw me in jail for the night. Just because I’m a homeless kid you’re
going to throw me in jail? Anyway, I make more money than that just
telling jokes.”

“Pretty absurd, actually. Spent all day here asking folks for spare
change, nobody could spare a thing. Here I am, homeless kid in
Cambridge, and nobody even has a couple spare pennies!”

To outward appearances he seems like a normal kid with a bit of an army
look. His hair is buzzed, he wears a wifebeater shirt with an army
jacket and baggy army pants. At first I thought this was just a style,
but actually it’s utilitarian — everything he owns is in the pockets of
those pants. He showed me what he had.

“Stole this from a friend today,” he said, pulling something out from
under his jacket. “Brand new CD player, awesome headphones, full
batteries, great CD inside.” He began playing it for me; it was rap
songs: Ridin’ and Eminem. “And check out this he said,” before pulling
out a PSP. “Got this when we were rich, but can’t use it for much now;
had to sell all our games so we could try to find a house.” He popped it
open. “See, no cartridges. Still, I borrow some from friends sometimes.”

There was a pause, as Eminem came out of his headphones, which he’d
cranked all the way up so I could listen. “Man, imagine if Eminem were
right here now, all those girls shaking their asses by him. Wouldn’t
that be crazy?” “Crazier things have happened,” I said. “Lots of famous
people go to Harvard Square.” “Yeah,” he said, “Beyonce was there the
other week — came in for a wedding or something — it was like a mob
scene, people jumping all over her.”

He often took the conversation in the direction of such imaginations —
what if a celebrity popped up here? He talked about how he used to play
*Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas* with a cheat code to make celebrities
appear in the game. But aside from these discursions, he was remarkably
cogent, pretty sane for someone in such a screwed-up situation.

“Man, my life sucks,” he said after a pause. “If you could do anything,
what would you do?” I asked. “If I could do anything?” he said. “Yeah.”
“Man, I’d be back at home with my mom and brothers and family and
stuff.”

He begun telling me something about his mom — how she’d managed to
recover one of her debit cards from the rubble of her car and bought a
new house, but never told him about it, he’d only heard rumor of it
third-hand, how she’d put her own child out on the street to fend for
himself, but I couldn’t quite hear him because the train pulled up as he
was talking. He finally stopped talking, but I strained, waiting for
more. “That’s your train,” he finally said, “you better catch it.”
“Sorry,” I said, walking towards it.

I grabbed a seat, hearing “Spare change? Spare change?” as the doors
closed and we pulled away. I started trying to read my book, but found I
wasn’t really capable of reading anything at all.


Alone in the Hospital
=====================

September 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitalbabies)

* * * * *

Going to the hospital has never been particularly safe, but hospitals
have tried to do what they can. In the early part of the 1900s,
hospitals became fanatical about sterility, to prevent infection. Each
infant in their care, for example, had its own white coat for doctors to
wear as they visited that infant, hung on hooks inside out for the next
doctor to don. Holding babies was considered dangerous (as signage
emphasized), so they were fed without being held — bottles were simply
propped up where the infants could get at them. Needless to say, parents
were denied visits.

And yet mortality rates for infants in hospital care ranged from 30 to
75 percent. The babies were cared for and nourished, they had no outward
physical problems, they simply succumbed to a mysterious phenomenon the
doctors labeled “failure to thrive”. Some thought it might be a hidden
infection.

So the nurses wore masks and hoods, carefully scrubbed up before they
handled infants. Some hospitals put infants in boxes with glove-valves —
the kinds you see in movies when scientists are handling radioactive
material — so that they’d never have to touch the infant at all. But the
problem just got worse.

Henry Bakwin, pediatric director of New York’s Bellevue Hospital, saw
this and thought that perhaps they were going about things exactly
wrong. The infants weren’t dying of infection, he believed, they were
dying of loneliness — a loneliness that made it easier for them to
succumb to infection. He took down the signs about washing hands and put
up signs requiring everyone to pick up and fondle a baby. And infection
rates went down.

Harold Skeels and a team at the Iowa Child Research Welfare Station
decided to try an experiment. They took thirteen girls out of
institutionalized care and had them “adopted” by older girls in “a home
for the feeble-minded”. Within nineteen months, the average IQs of the
adopted kids jumped from 64 to 92.

But these folks were the radicals. The mainstream scientific community
refused to believe there was anything wrong — people were blowing things
out of proportion, they insisted, and anyway, everyone knows children
that young can’t suffer from depression. The studies were flawed.

John Bowlby came at it from a different perspective. Interviewing
severely disturbed kids, he discovered they all shared a traumatic
separation from their parents when they were young. He concluded the
mother-infant relationship was essential to development and issued
recommendations much like Skeels and Spitz. “The mothering of a child is
not something which can be arranged by roster,” he wrote in reports for
the World Health Organization. But still the hospitals didn’t change.

Bowlby’s student John Robertson begun doing observation at hospitals. He
noticed that babies screamed painfully as they were admitted. The nurses
explained that this was normal and they’d soon settle down. He noticed
that these “settled” babies returned to violent fits when they were
taken home, attacking her as if they blamed her. The nurses said that
was normal too, mothers weren’t just as good at taking care of kids as
the nurses. Robertson had a different explanation.

He decided to make a movie to prove it. Unlike the last, this one would
be completely scientific. He would pick a name at random from the list
of babies, then always film them at a specific hour, clock in the
background, so you could tell he wasn’t cheating. The name he picked was
Laura.

When he went to find her he was devastated: Laura was the one girl in a
hundred who wasn’t crying; her parents had reared her so strictly that
she quietly restrained all her emotions. “I saw immediately [she] was
going to be the one child in a hundred who was not going to demonstrate
what I had been shouting my head off [about],” Robertson said. But he
couldn’t pick another child — that would be cheating. The project
continued.

The first day, Laura jumped out of her bath to the door in an attempt to
escape. Her smiles disappear and sometimes she quietly sobs while
clutching her teddy. “Where’s my mummy?” she asks repeatedly, while
trying hard to hold back tears. Each day she grows grayer until on the
fifth, when she appears unsmiling and resentful. Her mother comes to
visit (thanks to a special exception to the rules Robertson negotiated),
but she wipes away her mother’s kiss. When her mother waves goodbye, she
looks away. When her mother finally comes to take her home on the eight
day, she begins shaking with sobs. She gathers up all of her stuff, but
refuses to take her mother’s hand as they walk out.

They presented the film to the Royal Society of Medicine in London. The
audience was outraged. It was false, it was slander, it was a trick, it
was an atypical child, it was filmed selectively, it was edited
dishonestly. “People stood up and said that their children’s wards were
not like that, two-year-olds were all happy,” Robertson recalls.
Robertson was banned from some of the wards he was observing,
pediatricians walked across the street when they encountered him. The
hospital claimed that Robertson had interfered with the nurses trying to
care for Laura. As Robertson toured Britain with the film, the reaction
was always the same.

When Laura finally saw the film, six months later, she burst into tears.
“Where were you all that time?” she asked her mother.

Reviews in the medical journals, however, were all positive. And younger
nurses and doctors begun telling Robertson how they agreed with him and
would do things differently, if only they were in charge. And a few
higher-ups quietly sent some votes of support. So Robertson kept going.
He took the film to the United States, hoping for a similarly positive
reception. But the Americans insisted that while it was a great film
about Britain, it had no relevance in their country. And nobody was
willing to take the obvious step of letting mothers stay with their
children on the wards.

Not until 1955 were there signs of change. Fred Stone, a doctor at the
Royal Hospital in Glasgow, decided to do a pilot study. “I would drive
up the hill to come here,” he recalled, “and there would be two hundred
parents queueing up in the rain to get in for their half hour’s
visiting.” A colleague who had control of two pediatric wards decided to
offer one of them to Stone to prove that his suggestions wouldn’t work.

When the nurses heard about this, they threatened to resign together. To
placate them, Stone set up a series of meetings. “The aggression after
the first meetings was unbelievable, truly unbelievable,” he explained.
But the aggression soon turned to tears. “They said, ‘You don’t
understand what you are asking of us. [You mean] a parent can just walk
in and see how we’re neglecting these poor kids[?]’ […] And, of course,
at that point we had to say, ‘But what on earth makes you think that
we’re criticizing you? You’re doing an impossible job remarkably well.’
And, of course, then the tears came as you can imagine.” Finally they
agreed the experiment should at least be tried.

“I never heard any more about the issue at all. Nobody ever came back to
me and said, ‘The six months are up.’ Nobody ever reported that it had
been a success or a failure; all I knew was that somehow I heard that
two wards were doing it, four wards were doing it, the whole hospital
was doing it. And since then we’ve had almost unrestricted visiting in
the whole hospital.”

Similar experiments were conducted in London, although changes on the
Continent didn’t happen until the late 1970s. In 1959, the British
minister of health made it official policy. And in the early 1960s,
Robertson told BBC Radio parents that they should sit-in by their
children’s cot and force the hospital to try to evict them. Slowly the
tide began to turn.

*This article is based on Robert Karen’s tour de force book* [Becoming
Attached](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015).


A Feminist Goes to the Hospital
===============================

September 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/femhosp)

* * * * *

In *[A Pattern Language](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195019199)*,
Christopher Alexander comments on the idiocy of trying to nurse people
to health by locking them up in the land of the sick, but a visit to an
actual hospital makes the point more vividly than logical argument ever
could. The modern hospital is a place of nightmares, even visiting I
cannot manage to spend more than an hour here without beginning to go
insane. I cannot imagine how anyone ever escapes.

An island of white in an ocean of green, the modern hospital’s
landscaping dangles the promise of verdant beauty while its insides are
all white sterility. The hallways of identical doors twist and turn
around so much that it’s impossible to find any room that isn’t
carefully numbered, even after several attempts to try to discern the
building’s layout. The muted colors and dreary duplication do not reward
such attempts at investigation, or even mere attempts at life.

It seems like the building itself is ill. Odd pieces are blocked off
with white sheets, larger ones with completely opaque walls. Bizarre
machines with large tubes line the hallways, apparently standing in for
broken parts of the building’s innards, while workmen wander around
attempting to treat the other symptoms.

The rooms themselves are monstrous cells, tiny boxes with doors that
stay open and walls that fight any attempts at individuality or privacy.
The size makes entertaining guests awkward, while the lack of activities
makes loneliness unbearable.

Were the large sign reading “Hospital” to go missing, one might easily
mistake the facility as one for torture: men whose clothes have been
replaced by dreary gowns slowly wander the halls in dreary stupor, their
battered faces making them appear as if they have been badly beaten.
They are not permitted to escape.

Were one, under such amazing conditions, to try to mount an attempt at
fruitful work, it would quickly fail. Even assuming one was able to
muster the energy to focus, the noises through the thin walls and
unclosed doors would quickly distract. The beeps and buzzes from the
assorted machinery would frustrate to no end. The screeching
announcements from the loudspeakers would fast derail any trains of
thought. And if one manages to get past all these things, well, it will
only be a short while until a nurse or orderly comes to insert another
needle or run some other humiliating and invasive task.

And so one simply watches the seconds tick away, as in some odd form of
Chinese water torture. Sometimes the pain is made more vivid by the
combination of very real physical discomfort, which incapacity makes
difficult to alleviate. Itchiness, dirtiness, and restlessness are the
orders of the day, with powerlessness coming in to make sure the others
don’t escape.

Ostensibly this place is meant to cure things, the unimpeachable
knowledge of science and the clean sterility of the building meant to
combine to induce health. But, as before in history, the cure may be
worse than the disease. [Robert Karen has
documented](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitalbabies) how early
concerns about antisepsis led hospitals to keep children far away from
their parents. The result, as was plain to anyone paying attention, was
severe psychological trauma for the children, who assumed their parents
had abandoned them, leading to mental problems that last a lifetime.

While modern hospitals induce problems apparently less severe, they are
still problems. Again, the doctors that are supposed to help the
patients seem less concerned about the patients as people than bodies,
things to be measured and operated upon, puzzles to solve, problems to
fix. They do not tell the patient what is being done to them, do not
reap the benefits that could be received by engaging them in the search
for the solution, but instead only share knowledge when forced by law
and precedent, preferring to keep the real details private among the
priesthood of doctors and nurses.

[Barbara Ehrenreich and Deidre English
note](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1400078008) how well-off women of the
pre-feminist era suffered from mysterious symptoms of inactivity, a
condition they diagnose as the psychological result of their inactivity
and powerlessness; society entrusted them with no responsibility and so
their minds collapsed from lack of active use.

While women have made great strides in the years since, for many the
problem is still quite real. And laid up in a hospital, with domestic
and childrearing tasks undoable, they may find the responsibilities they
had fade away, their condition stripped back to that of their afflicted
forebearers.

And so patriarchical society and patriarchical medicine combine to strip
all vestiges of humanity away. No freedom, no responsibility; no
movements, no tasks; no privacy, no thought. The person becomes the body
that the doctors treat them as.

Friends and family may try to visit, in an attempt to bring a bit of
their outside world into this sterile place, but the awkward situation
strains even the best relationships. Friendly conversations become hard
when one party is lying in bed moaning, while strained family
relationships are stretched further, surfacing their most disgustingly
dysfunctional aspects. Family members, whatever else they may
accomplish, somehow learn the remarkable skill of knowing just what to
do to drive you up the wall. And as the hospital environment (along with
the psychological stress of seeing you trapped in it) drives them insane
as well, their presence quickly becomes more curse than blessing.

I’ve never seen an environment so effective at inducing such severe
psychological pain. After just an hour, I feel like screaming, tearing,
pounding, killing. I go “out of my mind” and yearn to get out of my body
as well, running around in circles, pounding against the floor, with not
even exhaustion appearing to cure me.

It needn’t be this way, for there is a cure: the joy of life. Sanity can
be restored through attempts at music, channeling the fundamental
disorder into form and elegance, focusing the energy toward good. Art,
especially the art of nature, as Alexander suggested, is likely another
cure. But hospitals aren’t built for that.

*Bonus:* [Life in the Hospital](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitallife)


A Unified Theory of Magazines
=============================

September 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/unifiedmagazines)

* * * * *

For as long as I’ve been building web apps, it’s been apparent that most
successful websites are *communities* — not just interactive pages, but
places where groups of like-minded people can congregate and do things
together. Our knowledge of how to make and cultivate communities is
still at a very early stage, but most agree on their importance.

A magazine, we may imagine, is like a one-way web site. It doesn’t
really allow the readers to talk back (with the small exception of the
letters page), it doesn’t even have any sort of interactivity. But I
still think communities are the key for magazines; the difference is
that magazines *export* communities.

In other words, instead of providing a place for a group of like-minded
people to come together, magazines provide a sampling of what a group of
like-minded people might say in such an instance so that you can pretend
you’re part of them. Go down the list and you’ll see.

The magazines of Condé Nast, for example, export “lifestyles”. Most
readers probably aren’t the “hip scene” the magazines supposedly cover,
but by reading these things they learn what to wear and what to buy and
what these people are talking about. Even their high-brow magazines,
like the *New Yorker*, serve the same purpose, only this time it’s books
instead of clothes.

The late, great *Lingua Franca* exported the university.
[Academephiles](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingmit), sitting at
home, probably taking care of the kids, read it so they could imagine
themselves part of the life of the mind. Similarly, the new *SEED*
magazine is trying to export the culture of science, so people who
aren’t themselves scientists can get a piece of the lab coat life.

Alumni magazines similarly export college life, so that graying former
college students can relive some of their old glory days, reading pieces
about library renovations as they recall having sex in the stacks. And
house organs export a particular kind of politics, telling you what a
party or organization’s take is on the issues of the day, giving you a
sense of the party line.

Run down the list and in pretty much every case you scratch a magazine,
you find an exported community. Magazines that want to succeed will have
to find one of their own.


Take the Easy Way Out
=====================

September 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/easywayout)

* * * * *

When I was a kid, people were always telling me that there was no
substitute for hard work. If I wanted to be smart, I had to sit and
force myself to read hard books. If I wanted to lose weight, I had to
force myself to exercise. If I wanted to play piano, I had to force
myself away from the computer to practice. Cheating, they explained,
would only cheat myself in the end.

And yet today I eagerly ran to the library to grab five large books (and
return seven more), felt an itch to go jogging, and walked away from web
surfing so I could go practice a musical instrument. The adults were
completely wrong.

Your body’s resistance to an activity isn’t an obstacle to be overcome,
it’s a message that you’re being an idiot, just like when your hand
hurts after you punch a wall. The right solution isn’t to start punching
the wall harder, it’s to look around for a tool to help you do the job.

In the case of books, the key is that you need to be sure to read books
that are at your level. If you read books about subjects you don’t know
enough to understand or that use a dialect you’re not familiar with,
it’s going to be hard and it’s going to be a waste of time. With losing
weight, the key is things like the Shangri-La Diet. And with learning an
instrument, the key is using [Bemani
games](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bemani) that actually make music
fun.

I’ve discussed the other two in other places, but why do Bemani games
work? First, you’re playing real music. Normally when you play piano,
you have to start on baby songs which are both infantilizing and
uninteresting, with real music not even on the horizon. Bemani games
start you on real songs from the beginning. Since the reason many people
get excited about musical instruments in the first place is the chance
to play their favorite song, this is a pretty compelling difference. And
the fact that the computer simplifies the song and fills in the notes
you don’t play for you makes it possible.

Second, Bemani games provide clear additional results in proportion to
additional effort. This is what makes them so much fun. I don’t know
about the real science, but in Barbara Ehrenreich’s novel *Kipper’s
Game* the plot revolves around some research showing that games like
that stimulate the pleasure centers of the brain. You get the high of
achievement, but it quickly wears off as you get used to your new skill
level, and so you want to do better so you can get another high.

This is also what makes these games so educational. Research on experts
has found such immediate feedback is essential to learning, calling the
general process “deliberate practice”. In deliberate practice, “subjects
should receive immediate informative feedback and knowledge of results
of their performance. The subjects should repeatedly perform the same or
similar tasks. When these conditions are met, practice improves accuracy
and speed of performance on cognitive, perceptual, and motor tasks
(Fitts & Posner, 1967; Gibson, 1969; Welford, 1968).” (K. Anders
Ericsson, et. al, “[The Role of Deliberate
Practice](http://www.freakonomics.com/pdf/DeliberatePractice(PsychologicalReview).pdf)”,
*Psychological Review*) Your attempts aren’t random — it’s very clear
what works and what doesn’t and you can adjust your strategies
accordingly.

Third, you can do them in small chunks. When you normally play an
instrument, if you hit a wrong note you often keep trying until you get
it right. But with Bemani games, the music just keeps marching on
without you. This might at first seem a disadvantage, but it means you
don’t get hung up on a mistake, each attempt takes at most as long the
song does. With real music, if you hit a difficult part of the song you
can easily get stuck trying over and over to get it right, before
getting frustrated and giving up on the whole thing. Keeping the music
moving forces you to look at the bigger picture.

The flip side of this is that playing the games gives you a continuous
sense of motion and progress. In the mid-1980s — the heyday of video
game research — some psychologists were trying to find out what video
games quite so much fun. They took the classic Wozniak/Atari game
[Breakout](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breakout) and started removing
components to see if kids stopped playing it. What they found was you
could remove just about everything — the levels, the score, the bouncing
off the paddle — everything except for the animations of the bricks
disappearing. It was making the bricks disappear, somehow, that made the
game fun. (Mind at Play, Loftus and Loftus)

I doubt Bemani games were made with these kind of principles in mind —
considering the history, it was probably just a coincidence. But it
shows that you could have created Bemani from them. All you needed to do
was pay attention to the fact that learning an instrument was
frustrating and tried to eliminate the frustrating part. Good designers,
when they see people having trouble using something they designed, don’t
tell the user to try harder. They fix the design. We should take the
same attitude when we design our life as well.

*Thanks to Emmett Shear for suggesting pieces of this post.*

*Updated 2006-10-09 to add the second paragraph of point three, which I
somehow omitted originally.*


Life in the Hospital
====================

October 1, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitallife)

* * * * *

*An extra-special guest post [hoisted from
comments](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/femhosp#c6)!*

> The very walls of the hospital seemed to suck the life out of
> me—painted in puke yellow—and the window, which did look out at some
> trees, unfortunately framed a week’s worth of grey, rainy weather. The
> floors and walls were filthy (I won’t even mention the bathroom); the
> furniture old, chipped and stained; the framed artwork (like an old
> puzzle drawing out of Boy’s Life magazine with faces and animals and
> broomsticks hiding in the trees) faded; the food rancid, stinky and
> inedibly heavy and overly sweet. I seldom saw the doctors wash their
> hands or use the Purell dispenser on the wall (I began to fear
> catching some super hospital germ infection). When I could finally
> walk the halls in my hideous hospital gowns and infantilizing slipper
> socks, I was tethered to a top-heavy pole with bad wheels, which made
> dragging it over any bumps or turning corners an exercise in futility.
> I begged to be let out, to be sent home where it was clean, where I
> could have simple healthy food and take a shower; I begged the
> residents, the doctors (when they came on rounds) to take the tubes
> out of me. And they just made me feel idiotic, patronized, weak and
> helpless.
>
> Finally, in the middle of one sleepless, endless night spent staring
> at the walls, being sure the clock was actually moving backwards, it
> occurred to me with perfect clarity that the patient is never going to
> win the battle with the doctors…because the doctors have all the
> weapons. Just then the door slammed open, yet another nurse threw on
> all the lights and jabbed me with a needle, filling me with some other
> substance she refused to identify. Oh god, it was the most horrible
> hospital experience I have ever been through. And the scariest part of
> it is that this hospital is on the list of the 100 Best Hospitals in
> Illinois. Imagine what the others not on the list are like.
>
> […]
>
> My brother has a theory. You go into a hospital to have something
> fixed but they immediately take you totally out of your normal
> environment: off your normal food and caffeine, off all your regular
> medications, etc. They do the surgery (or whatever) and invade your
> body with all sorts of foreign substances (IVs, narcotics, oxygen,
> TPNs, blood thinners, insulin, etc.) Then, as they gradually withdraw
> the foreign substances they have assaulted you with, they declare you
> “cured.” Then you are eventually allowed to go back home and resume
> your normal routine. Odd.


Fashion Notes
=============

October 2, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fashionnotes)

* * * * *

It is Boston in the Fall, when school starts and the kids begin to pour
in. Because I am a sad and lonely masochist, I have spent some sunny
days walking among the tree-lined streets of the city, observing the
happy, well-bred young people in their natural habitat. I have noticed
that these children of the elite appear to have some patterns in their
choice of clothing and thought that some of my more discerning readers
might wish to know how they too can appear to be a hip young Harvard
student.

**Girls:** Wear a tight bright shirt with a large neck and half-length
sleeves on top of tight light blue jeans.

**Guys:** Wear tight brown hoodies over a dark T-shirt on top of
semi-tight dark blue jeans.

That is all.


The Awfulness of College Lectures
=================================

October 3, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfullectures)

* * * * *

*What do the children of privilege do when not engaging in conspicuous
consumption while [wearing fashionable
clothes](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fashionnotes)? Why attend class,
of course! This bizarre, yet widespread, affectation seemed intriguing
enough that I decided to pursue a further investigation in my inimitable
“first-person snob” style.*

The Harvard students sit patiently outside the lecture hall as they wait
for the previous class to end. Many simply sit, but others, showing the
go-get-it-ness that got them into Harvard, begin attempting conversation
with their neighbors. The awkward situation shows through in the awkward
conversation (which, no doubt, they will learn to smooth over as they
get older) about superficial topics of schoolwork (never school content,
of course).

As the previous class exits, we file in and take our seats. Gabbing
continues somewhat for a while until, all of a sudden, as if by some
mysterious consensus, it completely silences. The professor seems
surprised too. “Well, uh, it got quiet all of a sudden,” he says
haltingly, “so I guess I better start talking.” For a professor in
social psychology, you think he’d show a little more interest.

He begins the lecture in the standard way since PowerPoint: a title
slide (with a cute illustration), a table of contents slide (which he
walks through interminably slowly), and then a series of chunks of text
and illustrations, which he walks through one by one. It’s so bad it
makes we want to tear my hair out. The content is largely superficial;
the presentation is unnaturally slow. (We literally spend a good five
minutes talking about a specific gross-out gag.)

But while this may be an extreme version of it, at its essence, this is
the college lecture. Someone who (we’ll give them the benefit of the
doubt) is quite smart appearing stupid for fifty minutes so that they
can communicate basic facts to kids “at their level”. Edward Tufte
teaches us to always ask about the information density of a method of
communication. The information communicated in this lecture could have
fit on one side of a single piece of paper.

There was a camera in the back of the hall, presumably recording the
proceedings. But had this been available online, I doubt I could have
forced myself to watch it. (The other day someone asked me why more
people don’t watch the recordings of MIT lectures made available for
free online. This is why.) The only reason the lecture is tolerable at
all is because there’s something captivating about being in the presence
of another human being, regardless of what they’re saying. But it
doesn’t seem like that communicates anything additional — whether you
see the guy in person or watch him at home, he’s still saying the same
stuff. And so when you watch him at home, there’s just not much there.

So if what he’s saying isn’t very interesting, why do we subject
ourselves to it? How did this become the primary method of education?
Why do kids paid tens of thousands of dollars, in large part to fly
someplace else to see someone say something they would have been bored
to watch at home?

Back at Harvard, as I walk out of the class I hear the students gabbing.
“Wow, I’m so glad I took this class,” one says. “That was the best
lecture I’ve ever been in.”


The Greatness of College Lectures
=================================

October 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/greatlectures)

* * * * *

The other week I saw Scott McCloud give a presentation at a local
college. Although he is not a professor himself, McCloud is a theorist
of comics. Edward Tufte (among countless others) calls his guide
*Understanding Comics* the best book on the medium. McCloud breaks
comics down to its essential: the use of sequential art to tell a story
— we see one thing, we see another, we imagine what happens in between.
And watching McCloud speak, I realized that his talk was a vivid form of
comics. The images weren’t just illustrations, they drove the story
along, with McCloud simply filling in the words to connect them
together.

After his talk, someone commented that McCloud’s presentation was the
best he’d ever seen. McCloud explained that there are two kinds of
presentations: “monkey bars”, where a presenter swings from slide to
slide, explaining each one in turn, and “magic carpet rides”, where the
presenter simply keeps talking, confident the slides will appear
underneath him to illustrate a point. McCloud gives a masterful magic
carpet ride.

Tufte himself is professor emeritus at Yale. These days he goes on tour,
rock-star style, teaching classes on presenting information. Tufte is a
brilliant presenter — his energy keeps the audience spell-bound for an
entire day. At one point, as I recall, he jumped up on a table and asked
us to imagine the information density of various media as charted from
one side of the room to the other. But what, I couldn’t help but wonder,
was the information density of this presentation? After all, hadn’t he
written four books on the subject? (Copies of which are given to each
participant to take home.)

Then there’s Lawrence Lessig, who’s presentations are so powerful and
influential that an entire style of presentation has been named after
him. At his peak, I saw him give a talk at the O’Reilly Open Source
Conference that had the audience, as Wes Felter put it, looking to start
a riot afterwards. Lessig’s rhythmic, almost hypnotic, presentation,
invariably blows people away.

Does these people’s talks communicate more information than their books?
I doubt it. But does a comic book communicate more information than a
novel? No way. And yet McCloud (and Tufte) endorse it anyway. It’s not
because of the medium’s informational density, it’s because of its
*emotional density*. The same is true of these presentations.

Reading Lessig’s books, you’ll probably learn more about the history of
copyright law and the other things he discusses in his talk. But you
won’t feel his righteous indignation against those “extremists on the
right and left” who are trying to distort its intentions and, in the
process, hurt our culture.

Writing is quite effective at communicating facts, but to become a
professional you need much more than a vast store of facts; you need to
learn ways of thinking. These are what lectures, at their best, can
provide. They show you how the speakers think about problems, how they
feel about them, and, in doing so, provide a more fleshed-out notion
than writing ever could.


What’s Radical About the Liberal Arts?
======================================

October 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/radicalarts)

* * * * *

The leaves are turning brown, the students are filling up Harvard Yard,
and the mass emails are filling up my mailbox, all reminding me that I
would be starting junior year right about now if I hadn’t left Stanford.
For an academephile like me, this inspires no small amount of nostalgia,
and so I’ve been eager to get my hands on a copy of Michael Berubé’s
bestseller, *What’s Liberal About the Liberal Arts?* (Copies had been
checked out of all the nearby libraries, so I spent the morning sitting
in the Harvard Coop reading the entire book there. Yeah, I’m such a
cheapskate.)

The book is a response to the conservative attacks on academia as a
leftist preserve in need of some affirmative action for conservatives.
In response, Berubé outlines a two-pronged plan for handling
conservatives in academia; an outline of a procedural liberalism for the
liberal arts. First, in the classroom, conservatives should be given
“reasonable accommodation” for their views, just like any other student
in the class. Second, in the professoriate, conservatives should try to
reform academia by joining it, just as the women’s liberation movement
did in the 1970s.

* * * * *

For the first, Berubé gives examples from his own classroom: a
conservative makes a claim (e.g. the Japanese internment was justified),
Berubé patiently acknowledges it, points to sources supporting and
opposes it, and sits down with the conservative outside of class to give
them further attention. Berubé comes off as unfailing patient and
gracious, while the conservatives appear wrong-headed and often simply
lazy.

And yet. Despite my enormous sympathy for Berubé — I tried to do my part
to oppose Horowitz and hanging out with the AAUP’s Graham Larkin at
Stanford is one of my more cherished memories — I can’t help imagining
myself in the position at the conservative. As Rick Perlstein (a mutual
friend) has noted, sometimes the only friends the far-right can find are
on the far-left. For *I* [was once almost tossed out of class
once](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001518) for my political views (in that
case, insisting that the US didn’t attack Vietnam to fight the spread of
Communism).

Berubé’s clear writing, intelligence, and thoroughgoing kindness made me
want to hop the next flight to Pennsylvania and audit his classes.
(Thankfully, he closes the book with two lengthy chapters summarizing
two major courses that he teaches, somewhat saving me the trouble.) But
had Berubé been my teacher, would things have been different? One
disagrees with Berubé at one’s own peril — his snark is sharp enough to
take your head clean off — but having seen his dismissive blog
commentary on leftists, I can’t help but wonder.

His not-as-left-as-thou attitude carries over into the book as well.
When conservatives attack a professor for claiming Israel is a “racist
state”, Berubé doesn’t defend him but instead mocks the professor’s
attempts to defend the comment. And when the discussion turns to
students who are fans of Michael Parenti (are there any?), he foresees
only two possibilities for their future: either they renounce Parenti or
they dumb themselves down to his level. I’m no fan of Parenti, but it
takes an awful lot of confidence to say the only people who could agree
with him are idiots.

Berubé longs for intelligent conservatives that he can debate, but when
it comes to intelligent leftists, he just wants to mock. But even if he
treated them the same, I’m not sure it’d be much better. The “I see
where you’re coming from, here’s someone else who makes that argument”
trick — while eminently reasonable — is incredibly effective at robbing
a young person of their moral indignation. It suggests that the question
isn’t one to be resolved, but simply one to be accepted as a fact of
life: some people believe the Vietnam War was to fight Communism, others
disagree. But when we’re talking about the lives of millions, such
ambivalence is more frustrating than outright disagreement.

Berubé discusses this too, in his penultimate chapter on postmodernism
(a discussion of how he discusses topics by discussing the topic of
discussion!). I can’t say I was convinced by his positions in the
Lyotard-Harbermas debate or the Rorty-Nagel one, but the discussion did
spur me to more thoroughly codify my own. And really, isn’t that what
the liberal arts — at their best — are about? Whether through a
combative debate with a partisan or a paternalistic moderation of the
subject by a procedural liberal, any time a teacher gets a student to
refine their views counts as a win in my book. The essential thing is
that the question — and the position — be taken seriously.

* * * * *

More serious is the second question: what do we do about groupthink in
the professoriate? Berubé makes the convincing case that academia’s lack
of conservatives is simply because it isn’t a very good job for them. I
know that if I was a young conservative, I’d be [riding the conservative
gravy
train](http://www.campusprogress.org/features/161/guy-benson-the-message-machine)
instead of spending years in graduate school. The cost-benefit analysis
isn’t even close.

But clearly academia isn’t completely infallible. How do you change the
culture of a field when it’s gone off-course? Berubé’s suggestion is
that you just play by the rules and stick to your principles. His
example is the women’s liberation movement, which succeeded in turning
feminism into a real mode of literary criticism. But that seems like a
somewhat atypical case.

What about economics departments, filled with professors whose theories
neatly support right-wing social principles but rarely conform with any
external evidence? What about psychology departments whose claims and
experiments all-too-often make a mockery of the scientific method?

No self-respecting scientist would admit to being interested in an
psuedoscience like psychology. If you tried (as I have) your friends
would loudly mock you for it. And if that doesn’t dissuade you, they
start wondering if you’re really as smart as they first thought. After
all, why would anyone intelligent go into such a bogus field?

I certainly don’t support an Academic Bill of Rights or any such
nonsense — I want to improve academia, not destroy it. In fact, I don’t
have any great ideas for solving these problems. But I also don’t think
it’s fair to simply dismiss them, as Berubé seems to. The
self-reinforcing groupthink of academia is a problem; it prevents
exactly the kind of critical sharpening that I argue is the best part of
education. And as a structural problem, it would seem to require a
structural change.

* * * * *

This is, to be clear, not the meat of Berubé’s book, which spends its
first half mocking the conservative critique on academia and the second
summarizing Berubé’s own classes. Indeed, I don’t think the proposals
I’m responding to account for more than a couple paragraphs of the text.
Nonetheless, those were the paragraphs that provoked my thoughts, so now
I’m defending them, just like a good student should.

* * * * *

-   [Buy the book from Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393060373)



College: Commodity or Community?
================================

October 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/collegecommunity)

* * * * *

When it was time for me to pick colleges, our family flew to Cambridge,
Mass. and went on the tour of Harvard University. It’s a grand, elegant
campus, the school has a singular reputation, the neighborhood is one of
the most interesting in the world. And yet, on the college tour, this
isn’t what they told us. They mentioned a bit about John Harvard and the
1700s but spent most of their time telling us how great it was they had
“shopping week”, where you could try out different courses for a couple
classes.

The other month, I visited the University of Chicago. Chicago has a
worldwide reputation as a tough-minded school. It seems like every field
has a “Chicago School” of thought and the University’s former presidents
are responsible for things like the Great Books. But you wouldn’t know
that from the tour — the only time actually studying was mentioned was
when one kid said he’d heard the University had a nose-to-the-grindstone
reputation. “Well,” the tour guide said, “you can work hard if you
want,” and then went back to talking about the sports program.
(“Whenever I feel like exercise,” the University’s president once said,
“I lie down until the feeling passes.”)

It was as if the entire admissions program had been through a focus
group, every bit of individuality shorn off. They put their
self-description through a series of tests and only the generic things
that every student finds themselves agreeing with survived the ordeal.
“Oh no,” they now insist, “we’re just like every university. We want to
let you be you.” But why go to a University for that? I can be me at
home just fine.

No, the real reason I want to go to a University — and the reason, when
you get right down to it, everybody else seems to be interested in as
well — is the people. I want to go to a place filled with people like
me, but smarter; a place where you can’t help but learn.

The key phrase there is “people like me”. What I want to know is what
the culture is like. To unfairly overgeneralize, people at Harvard are
snobbish, people at Stanford are lazy, and people at MIT are nerds. But
(with the possible exception of MIT which actually sells “nerd pride”
clothing) none of these places advertise this fact. After all,
advertising your individuality alienates some of the focus group. In
fact, that’s exactly the point!

And yet, somehow, the cultures remain. It’s not clear to me whether the
university itself has a culture (perhaps passed down by the older
students and professors) and whoever attends simply learns to conform or
whether there’s a secret bulletin I’m not getting about which university
each kind of person should go to. I suspect the former, since I’ve heard
that even houses at Harvard, to which students are assigned randomly
when they arrive, manage to develop a culture of their own.

So how to decide where to go?

There are some people who say that if you go to a large enough
university, you’ll be able to find a subculture of people you can get
along with. At MIT, for example, a complicated “rush” system at the
beginning of the school year allows incoming freshman to sample a
variety of dorms and then floors within that dorm to find the place they
belong. The dorms apparently put on lavish shows to communicate their
culture to the incoming students and people seem fairly happy with where
they end up.

MIT is a bit of a special case, of course, but some insists that similar
subcultures exist at every college, you just have to seek them out.
Perhaps that’s true, but even so, what’s the point of the university
then? There’s a subculture of people I can get along with right here; I
want to go to school for something a little more concentrated.

Colleges need to drop the focus-group-enforced blandness. [As Malcolm
Gladwell would put
it](http://www.ted.com/tedtalks/tedtalksplayer.cfm?key=m_gladwell&flashEnabled=1),
people don’t want ten varieties of bland tomato sauce to choose from.
Some people love mild and some love extra-chunky. Trying to appeal to
both only makes the experience worse for everyone. It doesn’t seem like
you should have to go to college to realize that.


Mamet on Auditions
==================

October 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mametacting)

* * * * *

*A special guest post from David Mamet’s* [True and
False](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679772642). *The discussion is
notionally about acting, but it applies far more broadly. Try
substituting “programmer” for “actor”, for example.*

> Those with “something to fall back on” invariably fall back on it.
> They intended to all along. That is why they provided themselves with
> it. But those with no alternative see the world differently. […]
>
> Those of you with nothing to fall back on, you will find, *are* home.

(34-36)

> The audition process selects for the most blatant (and not even the
> most attractive) of the supplicants. As a hiring tool, it is geared to
> reject all but the hackneyed, the stock, the predictable—in short, the
> counterfeit.
>
> […]
>
> The producers are not interested in discovering the new. Who in their
> right mind would bet twenty million dollars on an untried actor? They
> want the old—and if they cannot have it, they want its facsimile.
>
> These gatekeepers understand their job to be this: to supply the
> appropriate, predictable actor for the part. They base their choice on
> the actor’s appearance, credits, and quote—as if they were hiring a
> plumber.
>
> If this sounds tedious, reflect that the actor himself is habituated
> into the process and endorses it from his first experience of it. And
> his first experience is the school.
>
> The acting school and its lessons are may times harsh, but their rigor
> and extent is comfortable and predictable. The lessons of the stage,
> on the other hand, are often devastating and almost beyond bearing.
>
> The school, like the audition process, has a clear and simple
> structure of commands and rewards. If, and as long as, the student
> propitiates the teacher, she may be disappointed but she will rarely
> be humiliated. To the extent that she internalizes her subscription to
> the system (“It is harsh, but I know in my heart it is just, or at the
> very least, unavoidable”) she can enjoy freedom from anomie. If she
> never ventures out of the confines of the system, she can live,
> whether employed or unemployed, free from terror.
>
> Teachers of “audition technique” counsel actors to consider the
> audition itself the performance, and to gear all one’s hopes and
> aspirations not to toward the actual practice of one’s craft (which
> takes place in from of an audience or a camera), but toward the
> possibility of appealing to some functionary. What could be more
> awful?
>
> For much of the beauty of the theatre, and much of the happiness, is
> in a communion with the audience. The audience comes to the show
> prepared to respond as a communal unit. They come prepared (and
> expecting) to be surprised and delighted. They are not only willing,
> but disposed to endorse the unusual, the honest, the piquant.
> Everything the audition process discards.
>
> […]
>
> Don’t “confess” when you come offstage. If you have gained an insight,
> *use* it. THey say “silence builds a fence for wisdom.” To keep one’s
> own counsel is difficult. “Oh, how terrible I was… .” How difficult to
> keep those words in—how comforting they are. In saying them one
> creates an imaginary group interested in one’s progress. But give up
> the comfort of an imaginary group. This “group” that is judging you is
> not real; you invented it to make yourself feel less alone.
>
> I knew a man who went to Hollywood and languished jobless for a period
> of years. A talented actor. And he got no work. He came back at the
> end of the period and lamented, “I would have been all right if they’d
> just sat me down on day one and explained the rules.”
>
> Well, so would we all. But who are “they”? And what are the rules?
> There *is* no “they,” and there are no rules. He posited the existence
> of a rational hierarchal group acting in a reasonable manner.
>
> But show business is and has always been a depraved carnival. Just as
> it attracts the dedicated, it attracts the rapacious and exploitative,
> and these parasites can never be pleased, they can only be submitted
> to. But why would one want to submit to them?
>
> The audience, on the other hand, *can* be pleased. They come to the
> show to be leased, and they *will* be pleased by the honest, the
> straightforward, the unusual, the intuitive—all those things, in
> short, which dismay both the teacher and the casting agent.
>
> Keep your wits about you. It is not necessary to barter your talent,
> your self-esteem, and you youth for the *chance* of pleasing your
> inferiors. It is more frightening *but it is not less productive* to
> go your own way, to form your own theatre company, to write and stage
> your *own* plays, to make your *own* films. You have an enormously
> greater chance of eventually presenting yourself to, and eventually
> appealing to, an audience by striking out on your won, by making your
> *own* plays and films, than by submitting to the industrial model of
> the school and studio.
>
> But how will you act when you, whether occasionally or frequently,
> come up against the gatekeepers?
>
> Why not do the best you can, see them as, if you will, an inevitable
> and preexisting condition, like ants at a picnic, and shrug and enjoy
> yourself in spite of them.
>
> *Do not internalize the industrial model.* You are not one of the
> myriad of interchangeable pieces but a unique human being and if
> you’ve got something to say, *say* it, and think well of yourself
> while you’re learning to say it better.

(44-51)


Visiting Mission Hill
=====================

October 9, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/missionhill)

* * * * *

The new Mission Hill School is located in the middle of Boston, in
Roxbury. By the time the subway reaches the neighborhood, all the white
people have already left the train. The school itself is nestled into a
building long-ago abandoned by a Catholic High School. When it first
moved in, they found the remnants of the last high school class had
never been removed, their effects somehow frozen in time.

The streets are gritty, the faces dark, and I don’t exactly feel
comfortable walking outside. This isn’t the place you imagine starting a
“progressive school”. And when you learn that Mission Hill is a public
school, part of the Boston Public School system, it seems even less
likely. Yet, when educational reformer Deborah Meier set out to build a
modern school, that’s what she picked. They got a special license from
the government and the unions to operate it as a “pilot school” and
begun tossing out the normal rules and building it from the ground up on
progressive principles.

Meier has since left, as has Straughton, her successor, leaving a woman
who introduces herself as Ayla (everyone here goes by their first
names). Ayla seems a little overwhelmed, both by the demands of the job
and her sudden promotion to the top, but she somehow handles everything
with kindness and composure.

“Welcome to our school,” she says, smiling so sweetly that I have
trouble believing she’s a principle. As she continues talking, outlining
the school’s unique mission and the “habits of mind” it hopes to
achieve, some kids begin running and screaming in the halls outside. She
gets up and heads to the door. *Now we’ll get to see the other side of
her*, I think. *She seems nice enough to us but she’ll start screaming
at the kids.* But she doesn’t say a thing, she just closes the door and
sits back down with us.

After the overview, she takes us upstairs to get a sense of what
classroom life is like. The school is nice enough — “I wish I went to
school here,” the education students visiting with me gush — with happy
decorations, small class sizes (20 is the max.), friendly and dedicated
teachers, and very active classrooms. The kids, a very racially mixed
crowd, seem quite bright and full of joy, and I can’t help smiling for
the first twenty minutes, as we watch them bouncing around painting and
sculpting.

When we move to math class, things are a little different. For “morning
math meeting”, the kids sit in a circle in the front of the room, as the
teacher goes around asking each one to say something about subtraction
before writing it on the board. The teacher tries to be non-judgmental,
but when someone says something wrong, he can’t help but ask the rest of
the class if they think what that person said was right. (Once, when it
actually was right, he has to add the caveat “I’m not saying it was
wrong, I just want to know what other people think.”) At one point, a
child asks him to write a one with twelve zeroes up on the board, saying
it’s a million. The teacher points out that it’s a lot more than a
million and counts out for the class what it actually is. He miscounts
though, and claims it’s one septillion. (It’s only a trillion.) I don’t
say anything.

Later, the teacher tells us how much he likes morning math circle
because it gives everyone a chance to speak and think about things. But
it’s clear that most of the students are bored most of the time
(including me) while others don’t exactly enjoy speaking. Afraid they’ll
get the answer wrong and look stupid in front of the whole class, they
speak quietly or cover their mouth while they talk, trying to make sure
only the teacher can hear them. When the teacher indicates they were
right and asks them to speak up, then they’re happy to tell the rest of
the class.

After everyone has spoken, the class adjourns so people can get the
memoirs they’ve been working on to share with everyone. We head to a
class where they’re shouting out the names of states on a map. The class
is going to explain how America became America by looking at the
patterns of migration on maps, the teacher assures us, but right now it
looks like the class is only memorizing how to spell stupid state names.

At this point our visit is officially over and we have to head back to a
final wrap-up with the principal, but as I think about it and think back
to my own school experience, I begin to wonder: is this any different?

There are some differences, of course. This school feels much cozier and
comfortable, for example. I don’t feel odd just hanging out in the
halls. The teachers are all very self-conscious about trying to be
“student-centered” and “democratic” (the principal explains how they
terminated their relationship with an afterschool program because they
refused to stop giving kids rewards, referring skeptical
student-teachers to Alfie Kohn’s books for “an extreme position” on
rewards). But while their hearts may be in better places, it’s not clear
the effect is that much different.

Still, that in itself is a pretty incredible achievement. I went to an
extremely rich, white, private school on an expensive and lush campus in
the middle of the richest zip code in the country. That you can build a
public school of equal quality for kids in the inner city is an
impressive achievement. Just not the one I was expecting.


Visiting Olin College
=====================

October 10, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingolin)

* * * * *

Olin College is that rarest of breeds: a new one. “I didn’t realize
people were still starting colleges,” I heard someone say when they
first heard about it. The Franklin W. Olin Foundation, after funding
engineering buildings on lots of college campuses, finally decided to
try to build a whole school itself, eventually putting all of its money
(an estimated \$400 million) into Olin College and dissolving itself.

The college is not shy about spending the money. Every Olin student gets
completely free tuition and a laptop full of engineering software. It
has a big beautiful campus on the outskirts of Boston with three huge
classroom buildings and six wings of dorms; each student gets a
state-of-the-art dorm room.

The buildings are big and imposing. I first visited several years ago
over the summer, back when Olin was just starting and no one was around.
It was odd walking through the large, newly-built buildings all alone. I
tried to imagine what it would be like when class was in session.

And here I am, years later, as I head to my first class. A kind and
eager student, who I’ll call Lex, picked me up at the T stop and drove
me to the campus and is now delivering me to the Computer Architecture
course, which everyone insists is one of the best-taught on campus (by
which, they apparently mean that the teacher is really funny). As we
walk through the hallways at 9am I again don’t see a single other
person. “Guess nobody wakes up this early,” I say.

Lex hands me off to a student in the Computer Architecture class who
looks exactly like I imagined: long beard, geeky shirt, started several
open source projects. He takes me into class — which, despite Olin’s
reasonable gender balance in the student population as a whole, remains
mostly male — where students are gabbing about things they’ve built with
op-amps and breadboards before things start. While I’ve heard of
breadboards, I’ve never seen one, let alone played with one before
class, and I have to admit I’m not sure what an op-amp is. *Wow*, I
think, *these kids are smart.*

Nobody here knows who I am — an odd experience for me, since lately I’ve
only been hanging out with friends or going to conferences where people
know of me. When they ask, I simply say I’m from Cambridge — a
programmer at a startup if they push, but few do. Everybody just assumes
I’m a prospective student visiting and looks down on me accordingly. I
just try to keep quiet.

The class itself is taken up by having students do exercises on the
whiteboards and then share their results with the class. Students here
seem a little less embarrassed about getting things wrong in front of
everyone; they’re happy to describe what they did from their seats.
After everyone has shared, the class ends, and I leave, disappointed.

It’s still early, so Lex decides to take me on a tour of the facilities.
Olin College was designed by and for engineers, the idea being that
students who complete the program will have a full, rounded education in
engineering. So there are classes in math and physics and basic
principles of engineering, all unified into a project-based integrated
courseblock or something like that. Then there are classes in materials
science and biological science, classes in human factors and
understanding the requirements of actual users, classes in building
stuff and classes in using it.

There are lots of toys all over, great food, and an administration which
is always asking how they can improve things further. The place reminds
me of nothing so much as Google, which even has a similar kind of
campus. I suppose it makes sense: this is what happens when you have
engineers build an institution.

I grab some pasta for lunch (like at Google, the food isn’t really my
style) and follow Lex to a table. Unlike at other schools, Lex explains,
kids here don’t sit in cliques. Everybody knows everybody else, so the
tables just fill up in order. We sit across from two kids who somehow
turn the conversation from Dean Kamen’s ego to mobius strips, before
telling us about a paper they’d written proving that a certain kind of
graph of odd *n* can be reformulated on a mobius strip as a series of
pentagons, showing us how by drawing on a napkin. (There are boxes of
napkins on the tables, I notice, but not boxes of pens. Pay attention,
institution builders!) The work seems quite impressive; I wonder if it
could be published in an actual journal.

The kids also gab about student life. So-and-so is having a birthday and
they’re going to get a keg later to celebrate. Everybody laughs and then
they assure me that it’s only a root beer keg. Then they’re going to get
a bunch of ice cream too, so it’ll be a huge root beer float. After
lunch, I head out with them to downtown Boston to grab the keg and head
back, a process that takes up most of the afternoon.

On the way back we stop at a music store. Bored, I pull out my Sidekick
and check my email, which draws a store employee’s attention.
Long-haired and with a weathered face in a tight black shirt, he speaks
in a rocker’s drawl. “Whooaaaa, what is thaaaat?” he says and I quietly
explain. He tells us how he thinks computers will eventually be replaced
by miniature devices, which will be able to communicate with each other
by bouncing satellite signals off the moon. “Or the sun,” he adds.

To distract him, I think of saying that my companions are just the
geniuses to build such a thing, but they save me the trouble. “Are you
guys at MIT?” he asks. “No,” they say, and I realize Olin has a ways to
go before its brand catches up with its curriculum. He says he has a
friend who’s an expert in seeing the big picture and offers to hook the
guys up so they can take on the small device manufacturers. (The Olin
students immediately begin thinking about the tools they’d need to build
small devices.) He takes down their names and emails before we head
back.

“You have to recognize that everyone has a point of view about
technology,” one Olin student says thoughtfully. “They taught us that on
the designing-for-humans course.” “And even if he is crazy,” the other
adds, “his friend might be cool.”

When we get back, I beg off from my guide Lex, saying I’d like to just
tour the place for myself for a bit. Lex and her circle remind me a
little of Olin cultists — whenever I ask about Olin their eyes go wide
and they tell me that it’s the greatest place ever. Perhaps that’s true,
I think, but I want to see for myself.

As I walk around the campus in the middle of the afternoon, I notice
it’s still empty. As far as I can tell, the campus never fills out much
more. It turns out 300 people don’t really fill up a large campus (they
barely fill up a large auditorium) which means the whole place feels
like a ghost town. The immaculately cleaned, yet mysteriously empty
buildings everywhere make just walking around feel creepy and lonely.

I catch up with an old friend of mine, who I’ll call Rob, who ended up
going to Olin. Rob is deeply cynical about the place and we head to the
campus of Babson College (a leading business school which is literally
located across the sidewalk from Olin) to dish. The Babson campus,
although designed by the same hideous architect, feels like a breath of
fresh air after Olin’s imposing emptiness. For one thing, there are
students everywhere — Babson is over ten times the size of Olin. For
another, the place is filled with trees, making the whole thing feel
smaller and cozier. I don’t recall a single tree on the Olin campus, for
whatever reason.

The mistake everyone makes, Rob explains, is that they think Olin is a
school for *hackers*, This isn’t unreasonable, since in the computer
industry, hackers are often formally called engineers. But Olin is using
engineer in its traditional sense, as people who just generally build
stuff. Computer hacking makes up just a tiny part of the curriculum and
an even smaller part of the culture. And so computer geeks who end up
attending Olin just end up feeling left out. Rob is even thinking of
taking programming classes at Babson.

Plus, things aren’t as friendly as they seem. At orientation they were
big on insisting Olin was a “feedback culture” — complete with
role-playing exercises about how to properly give feedback (which Rob
failed; he insists they claimed his invitation to lunch was “too
negative”) — but apparently they don’t actually listen to the feedback
much. The kids sitting near Rob at the dinner table all agree. One even
pulls out a card they gave him with tips on the proper way to give
feedback. (When I ask her later, Lex insists that every new batch of
students has its own culture. And this one, she says, enjoys “shaking
things up” while hers enjoys stabilizing them.)

Despite Olin’s claims to be “working with” students, Rob insists that
the place feels a lot more like “doing to”. Instead of having rules, for
example, they have a loose honor code with provisions like “respect for
others”. But “respect for others” apparently turns out to mean “respect
for authority” in practice — a student who ran their own WiFi base
station even after the campus IT department asked for it to be taken
down was hauled before the student tribunal on charges of showing
insufficient “respect for others”.

All of this just makes the place feel even more creepy. I think back to
the kids tittering about pretending to drink alcohol, about their
soliloquies for Olin’s greatness. *Friendly fascism* is the term that
comes to mind.

It’s getting late so I try to find Lex to give me a ride home, but we
end up at the kegger party. Olin students insist they know how to party
just like everyone else, but as you might expect, it’s the weirdest
party I’ve ever been too. The lights are turned down low and an iTunes
visualizer is placed on the TV screen, as some kids try to awkwardly
dance. But it’s not dark or drunk enough for that, so instead the girls
go around standing on tip toes and giving each other hugs while speaking
in high-pitched voices, before going to get costumes to prance around
in.

Finally they break open the keg (there is some humor at how the
engineering students can’t figure out how to operate it) but the root
beer doesn’t improve the scene much. I finally manage to find Lex and
prevail upon her for a ride back to the train station and as we ride
through the darkness she muses about Olin on the way home. I try to tell
her what I feel, but it’s clear she doesn’t really want to hear it. To
her Olin is a place of wonder; she wants validation, not refutation. I
suppose my feedback is “too negative”.

iz r childrens lrnng?
=====================

October 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverlearning)

* * * * *

*[High School Confidential](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743283635)*\
 by Jeremy Iversen\
 Atria, 464 pp., \$25.00

*[My Freshman Year: What a Professor Learned by Becoming a
Student](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0143037471)*\
 by Rebekah Nathan\
 Penguin, 208 pp., \$14.00 (paper reprint)

Some of our most formative years are spent in schools, odd places whose
ostensible goal is adult-directed education but in reality are
controlled by student-culture peer groups of which adults have little
actual understanding. Adults run examinations and programs, try to be
“hip” to teen culture, but ultimately, we must admit, we have little
idea what really goes on, making it easy for rumors to run wild.

Jeremy Iversen and Rebekah Nathan decided to see for themselves what
school life was really like, by going undercover and experiencing it
themselves. While they went to different places, in different guises, in
entirely different situations (Iversen was a senior in high school,
while Nathan was a freshman in college), the pictures they draw are
startlingly similar: a world where genuine education is absolutely the
last thing on everyone’s mind.

* * * * *

Jeremy Iversen grew up in New York, attended a prestigious boarding
school, and went to college at Stanford. But, he says, life after school
didn’t have the same appeal. So he decided to go back and get the
typical high school education he never had. The result — *High School
Confidential* — is a gripping memoir of what life is actually like for
the cool kids in a southern California high school.

The general outlines are perhaps less than shocking to those who have
been paying attention. High school kids routinely have casual sex with
each other, for example. (“There’s nothing else to do in this town,” one
student comments, “except start drama with everybody.”) They take drugs
— marijuana, cocaine, ecstasy, speed — right under their parents noses.
(In one scene, Travis, the class’s drug dealer, and Alexis, his sister,
are confronted by their father. “I’m going to give you a drug test,” he
warns them. “But I’ve been clean since nursery!” Travis replies. “Oh,
it’s only your sister I’m worried about,” explains the father.) The kids
cheat, not just by copying on tests, but by taking copious steroids and
human growth hormone to compete in sports. (“I read an article about
high school steroid use in *Sports Illustrated*”, comments the team
coach, as the kids who are using look away. “Good thing that’s not a
problem in our school.”)

Despite living in a very diverse community, many of the kids are full of
casual racism and right-wing politics (white people need to stand up for
their heritage, nuke all the Arabs), although they’re far more liberal
in practice (doing drugs with their Middle Eastern friends). When they
get mad at each other, they aren’t afraid to take it out in violent
brawls. And when the school throws parties, everybody gets totally
hammered. (There’s a brilliant scene where some kids throw up on Richard
Nixon’s grave.)

However, the novel is gripping in its details, with more amusing
characters and fascinating stories than any television show imitation of
high school life. The teachers are such characters that were this
fiction you might accuse them of being overwritten. School events are so
lavish (a band performs every day at lunch, large coordinated
dance-and-light shows are done for spirit rallies) that they seem like
TV exaggerations. School assignments are so inane (cut apart this cat)
that you might think the kid telling you this was exaggerating. But
Iversen was there, the dialogue in the book is copied down verbatim, the
description of events was taken first-hand.^[1](#fn:1)^

And, indeed, the most shocking components are not the tales of the kids,
but of the schools. Iversen draws a picture of an institution that is
not just failing at learning, but antithetical to it. Thea, the only
girl in the book with any academic passion, is routinely discouraged by
the actions of both peers and adults. But no other student even gets
that far. The school’s student culture makes caring about class
unthinkable; the school’s classes make learning near-impossible.

But the grandest component of Iversen’s tale is how he dismantles our
previous methods for trying to understand how schools operate. First,
there is Derrick, the school board’s secret weapon. Derrick is an
articulate and popular student, admired by all, and elected class
president. But it slowly becomes clear that student government,
including him, is nothing but the administration’s pawn. The regulations
are designed to make genuine complaints impossible to bring before the
administration, while the administration uses Derrick at every
opportunity as a mouthpiece for their lies about what the children
really think. Thus the only student representative most outside adults
see is no representative at all.

Then there are the standards regulations, around which the curriculum is
supposedly organized. The state school accreditation team is coming to
verify that it is, and the adults worry that they’re quite likely to
fail. So the principal goes all-out, bribing, threatening, and faking
the school into appearing good. Any kid who ever caused a problem is
locked away in a hidden trailer for the duration of the inspector’s
visit, every class is replaced with fake, scripted, standards-compliant
material. Every child puts on fake happy faces under severe duress. And
the school passes with flying colors. “I wish every kid in the state
could have an education this good”, insists the lead inspector.

The reality is that between adult and student, there is a vast gulf in
mentality. Iversen’s genius is that he can get us inside the heads of
both sides.

* * * * *

Around the same time, Rebekah Nathan, an anthropology professor at AnyU
(both psuedonyms), was sitting in on some classes herself. She noticed
that simply by acting like a student — sitting in class, taking notes,
etc. — her fellow students began treating her like one, sharing gossip
and trading facts she never got to see as a professor. Eager to cross
that same mental gulf, she decided to spend her sabbatical the following
year doing an undercover anthropological study of her own university.

Nathan enrolled as a freshman, lived in a dorm, and took a full load of
courses. Despite looking like a mom, the other students accepted her as
their own. She probably couldn’t get involved in the party scene and
didn’t try — she stuck to studying the academic and intellectual side of
college life — but pretty much everything she says fits with my
impressions as a freshman Stanford student around the same time and I
can even confirm a couple of her more surprising specific points.

After confining her focus to the intellectual, Nathan discovers that
there simply isn’t much there. Students have their own culture with
regard to class, a language known as “Undergraduate Cynical”, where
actually caring about the material is deeply frowned upon, and the only
questions you’re permitted to ask of a teacher are about the details of
grading and assignments:

> A good question, I learned, is one that voices a concern shared by
> other students or that asks for clarifications of upcoming work. “Will
> there be more questions on the test from the text or the lecture?”
> “Should the paper be double- or single- spaced?” […]
>
> […] “What does that mean?” is, incredibly, just not the kind of
> question that an American college student would ask.

This isn’t just show; students genuinely aren’t engaged in classes. They
don’t do the required reading, they dash off assignments, they ditch
classes, they cheat on tests. Some go up and talk to the teacher about
things, but they do so with ulterior motives in mind. Signs and talks
geared to incoming students explain that one must “work the teachers” by
talking to them, getting them to recognize you so they will give you
hints about tests and go easy on you when you need exceptions. “I take
the information I need from the professor”, one highly-successful
student tells Nathan, explaining what that consists of: “how they’re
going to grade you and what they think is important”. Everything is seen
as part of the game, not worthwhile for its own sake.

But it’s all too easy to lament this sad state of student affairs,
perhaps complain about the laziness of modern students. But Nathan goes
one step further: she shows *why* it is happening. For even she, a
professor with a Ph.D, finds herself doing the exact same things. “We
don’t need to study those things, they won’t be on the test”, she tells
her study partner Rob. It takes Rob, a fellow student, to ask her
whether she just cares about learning for its own sake.

The culture of Undergraduate Cynical, you see, is not created by student
laziness or a lack of concern for intellectual life. It’s created by the
necessities of the schedule. Students simply don’t have time to care.
They take three to five classes, each with separate sections and lab
assignments, each with its own schedule of papers and readings and
adults to suck up to. That alone is enough to drive Rebekah crazy,
despite her thinking she had pretty good time management skills juggling
all her commitments as a professor. But on top of that most students go
to activities and clubs, work an on- or off-campus job, party in the
evenings, and try to maintain relationships. When you run the math,
there just isn’t enough time to care.

So students instead focus on doing what’s required of them: just
scraping by. Anything that won’t impact their grade much is tossed and a
desire to learn becomes a desire to pass. It’s hard to imagine any
sincere desire to learn surviving such a harried schedule. As soon as
you get engrossed or a book or topic, you have to dash off to your next
meeting.

Again, this is all something completely invisible to the professors.
They spend their days worrying about tomorrow’s lecture and are shocked
when students don’t do the same. But the students haven’t had time:
they’ve had two more classes and who knows how many assignments in the
interim. And, anyway, they only picked this course because it filled a
convenient hole in their schedule, they’re not even sure what it’s
about.

So the students simply don’t get engrossed, student discussion groups
don’t actually discuss things, but instead each student simply makes up
a point of view and shares it so they don’t get a zero on their in-class
participation grade. There is no “meeting of the minds” on any subject;
there are hardly any minds.

* * * * *

Both books, their research being conducted undercover, will no doubt
lead some to raise ethical questions. Jeremy Iversen had to deceive and
mislead his fellow students — including creating a fake backstory — in
order to experience life with them. Rebekah Nathan, while not explicitly
lying, led students to believe she was just an older woman going back to
school, and certainly not one of their professors.

But deception alone is not an ethical violation. Psychology studies
routinely deceive subjects into thinking the experiment is about X, when
actually it is about Y. (I myself have been so deceived.) The key
difference, and in my opinion the only possible ethical lapse on Iversen
and Nathan’s part, is that after the study is over, the psychologists
explain what was really going on. Neither Nathan nor Iversen told their
friends afterwards, leaving them only to discover it after the project
had gone public.

(By contrast, Barbara Ehrenreich, in *Nickeled and Dimed*, her study of
low-wage work, told her fellow workers at the end that she was working
on a book about the experience. They were “remarkably blasé” about it,
she found.)

But more generally, important scientific projects like these might have
to step on a few ethical toes. Some of the greatest experiments in
psychology — the Milgram experiments on obedience to authority and
Zimbardo’s Stanford Prison Experiment — were easy fodder for armchair
ethicists. But while people may have their feelings ruffled, in all of
these experiments there was little lasting hurt to the participants,
while the educational consequences of the studies themselves have been
immense.

* * * * *

The real ethical question is how we can justify forcing our children
into such institutions of anti-intellectualism. Iversen found that high
school students were quite conservative politically, even more so than
their parents, and perhaps it’s not surprising that Bush’s
anti-intellectual charm appeals to kids who daily experience education
as a form of torture.

Perhaps students learn something by going through the necessary motions
required to get a degree, but I defy anyone to read both of these
accounts and continue to insist that schools are teaching kids to be
“critical thinkers” with a “life-long love of learning”. If anything,
the real education is in the opposite.

Instead of critical thinkers, we have kids willing to accept any
requirement, no matter how absurd, without question. “If you write what
you want to that prof,” explains a successful senior, “you’re gonna end
up with a bad grade. Whereas, if you write to *them*, you win—you can
still have your own mindset and say, hell, I know this isn’t the way I
feel, but I’ll give them what they want.” But, as experiments in
cognitive dissonance have shown us, if one continues saying what one
doesn’t feel, one begins feeling it before too long. It’s easy to see
how this is effective training for professionalism, which actually means
doing what you’re told, despite what you believe. But it’s hard to see
how this system is going to generate students who will buck a trend.

Instead of life-long learners, we have kids who learn that genuine
learning is a joke. “Education” becomes that stupid thing in classrooms
that you have to do to get a decent job, an entirely mercenary
perspective that’s unhelpfully encouraged by the mercenary pressures of
student loans. If the only education you’ve ever experienced is doing
what’s necessary to get a good grade, why would you do it when the
grades weren’t around?

Our public high schools were supposed to make every child a good citizen
of the democracy. Our great universities were supposed to show young
people our grandest achievements. One could say that these institutions
are failing at their jobs, but it might be more accurate to say that
they’re being all too successful.

**Notes**

* * * * *

1.  Some of the more verbal students at the school, upset at being
    hoodwinked by an undercover writer and disappointed at their
    portrayal, have taken to posting nasty comments on web sites and in
    the school paper suggesting that Iversen’s book is fictionalized.
    But, as far as I can see, everything they claim that he left out, he
    actually included (with a single exception: one person on the
    Internet claimed kids called him “Plasticface”) and they have failed
    to dispute any details he included. So, while no doubt Iversen’s
    book contains errors (every book does, especially one as difficult
    to write as this), I’m compelled to believe it is largely
    accurate. [↩](#fnref:1)



[image1_undercoverlearning]: image1_undercoverlearning.jpg
[image2_undercoverlearning]: image2_undercoverlearning.jpg

Getting it Wrong
================

October 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingitwrong)

* * * * *

Anyone who’s spent any time around little kids in school, or even read
[books about people who have](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0201484021),
knows that they’re terrified of getting the answer wrong. Geez, you
don’t even need to hang around little kids. When you’re out chatting
with a bunch of people and you say something that shows you didn’t know
something, you look embarrassed. When you’re playing a video game and
not doing well, you try to come up with an excuse. People hate failing,
so much so that they’re afraid to try.

Which is a problem, because failing is most of what we do, most of the
time. The only way to stretch your abilities is to try to do things a
little bit beyond them, which means you’re going to fail some of the
time. Even weirder are the competitive situations. If I’m playing a game
that relies solely on practice against someone who’s practiced more than
me, I’m probably going to lose, no matter how good a person I am. Yet I
still feel degraded when I do.

Anyone who wants to build a decent educational environment is going to
need to solve this problem. And there seem to be two ways of doing it:
try and fix the people so that they don’t feel embarrassed at failing or
try to fix the environment so that people don’t fail. Which option to
pick sometimes gets people into philopolitical debates (trying to
improve kids self-esteem means they won’t be able to handle the real
world! preventing kids from experiencing failure is just childish
coddling!), but for now let’s just be concerned with what works.

Getting people to be OK with being wrong seems tough, if only because
everybody I know has this problem to a greater or lesser degree. There
are occasional exceptions — mavericks like Richard Feynman (why do *you*
care what other people think?) often seem fearless, although it’s hard
to gauge how much of that was staged — but these just seem random, with
no patterns suggesting *why*.

It seems quite likely that a lot of the fear is induced by a
goal-oriented educational system, obsessed with grades for work (A, B,
C) and grades for students (1st, 2nd, 3rd). And perhaps the fear of
being wrong you see in older people stems from having been through such
experiences in childhood. If this is the case, then simply building a
decent non-coercive environment for children will solve the problem, but
that seems like too much to hope for.

Perhaps the solution is in, as some suggest, building self-esteem, so
that when kids are wrong on one thing, they have other things to fall
back on. I certainly see this process operating in my own mind: “pff,
sure they can beat me in *Guitar Hero*, but at least I can go back to
writing blog entries”. But self-esteem is like a cushion: it prevents
the fall from being too damaging, but it doesn’t prevent the fall.

The real piece, it would seem, is finding some way to detach a student’s
actions from their worth. The reason failing hurts is because we think
it reflects badly on us. I failed, therefore I’m a failure. But if
that’s not the case, then there’s nothing to feel hurt about.

Detaching a self from your actions might seem like a silly thing, but
lots of different pieces of psychology point to it. Richard Layard, in
his survey *[Happiness: Lessons from a New
Science](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0143037013)*, notes that studies
consistently find that people who are detached from their surroundings —
whether through Buddhist meditation, Christian belief in God, or
cognitive therapy — are happier people. “All feelings of joy and even
physical pain are observed to fluctuate, and we see ourselves as like a
wave of the sea—where the sea is eternal and the wave is just its
present form.” (p. 191)

Similarly Alfie Kohn, who [looks more specifically at the studies about
children](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743487486), finds that it’s
essential for a child’s mental health that parents communicate that they
love their child for who they are, no matter what it is they *do*. This
concept can lead to some nasty philosophical debates — what are people,
if not collections of things done? — but the practical implications are
clear. Children, indeed all people, need unconditional love and support
to be able to survive in this world. [Attachment parenting
studies](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015) find that even infants
are afraid to explore a room unless their mother is close by to support
them, and [the same findings have been found in
monkeys](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0738202789).

* * * * *

The flip side is: how do we build educational institutions that
discourage these ways of thinking. Obviously we’ll want to [get rid of
competition](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0395631254) as well as
[grades](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618001816), but even so, [as we
saw with Mission Hill](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/missionhill), kids
are scared of failure.

While I’m loathe to introduce *more* individualism into American
schools, it seems clear that one solution is to have people do work on
their own. Kids are embarrassed in front of the class, [shy people get
bullied in small groups](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0226503550), so all
that really leaves is to do it on your own.

And this does seem effective. People seem more likely to ask “stupid”
questions if they get to write them down on anonymous cards. When people
[fail in a video game](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/easywayout), it
only makes them want to try again right away so they can finally beat
it. Apparently when nobody knows you’re getting it wrong, it’s a lot
easier to handle it. Maybe because you know it can’t affect the way
people see you.

Schools can also work to discourage this kind of conditional seeing by
making it completely unimportant. Even Mission Hill, which ensured every
classroom was mixed-age, still had a notion of age and clear
requirements for graduating. What if school, instead of a bunch of
activities you had to march through, was a bunch of activities students
could pick and choose from. When people are no longer marching, it’s
hard to be worried about your place in line.

But can we take the next step? Can schools not just see their students
unconditionally, but actually encourage them to see themselves that way?
Clearly we could teach everybody Buddhist meditation or something
(which, [studies apparently
show](http://www.psychosomaticmedicine.org/cgi/content/abstract/65/4/564),
is effective), but even better would be if there was something in the
structure of the school that encouraged this way of thinking.

Removing deadlines and requirements should help students live more fully
in the moment. Providing basic care to every student should help them
feel valued as people. Creating a safe and trusting environment should
free them from having to keep track of how much they can trust everyone
else. And, of course, all the same things would be positive in the
larger society.

Too often, people think of schools as systems for building good people.
Perhaps it’s time to think of them as places to let people be good.

*Tomorrow:* Getting it Right


Getting It Right
================

October 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingitright)

* * * * *

There’s an interesting little experiment you can do. If you have a
classroom of kids and you give them a bunch of tasks they can work on of
varying difficulty, the kids will pick the tasks that are just outside
their level, that stretch them to do a little bit more. (This is, of
course, if they aren’t getting graded on this. If they’re getting
graded, they’ll always pick the easy ones.)

When I first heard about this experiment, I just assumed it was because
they were good kids. But now I think there’s a different explanation.
It’s because doing this is fun.

Working on something that’s too easy for you isn’t enjoyable, it’s just
mindless. (There’s a reason few people play [50K
Racewalker](http://www.hrwiki.org/index.php/50K_Racewalker).) But doing
something that’s too hard for you isn’t fun either. It’s just like
trying to run through a wall: you’re not going to succeed and you’re not
going to learn much from it. So, like Goldilocks, the kids pick the task
that’s just right.

But it’s not simply by default either. There’s something actively
enjoyable in itself about learning to achieve more. (I’ve [come to call
this](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/easywayout) the “Kipper effect”,
after the novel Kipper’s Game which revolves around this idea.) There’s
a definite high to achievement, the rush of accomplishment, just as
there’s a corresponding low when you fail.

I’m looking for more research on this idea — and I’d be very grateful if
anyone could point me to it. What kinds of things trigger the Kipper
effect? Does it wear off? etc.


Blast from the Past
===================

October 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/schooltool)

* * * * *

I was reorganizing some of my files when I came across [this
website](http://www.aaronsw.com/soapbox/), a proto-blog kind of thing I
apparently made aroun 1999 (to judge from the content). There, too, I
wrote a review of two books about our educational system, and it was
interesting to look at how my writing style and views have changed.

While the writing style is certainly childish and poorly-edited, it’s
not unreadable (certainly not as unreadable as some academic writers)
and the content is still reasonably sophisticated (with a bit of
rewriting, the content could have passed for a blog post last week). And
the web design is not too bad either, all things considered.

So, for this week’s Sunday Bonus Post, here’s [an
excerpt](http://www.aaronsw.com/soapbox/compclass.html):

> Teachers spend more time teaching students how to do research instead
> of teaching them research skills […]. One project put on by teachers
> at the North Shore Country Day School [the school I attended at the
> time] asks students to rate the quality of life for different
> countries. The students were eager to get into a discussion of the
> most important factors in a measurement of quality of life and the
> proper way to compare radically different countries. However, the
> teachers required that the students make these decisions quickly so
> that more time could be spent on learning computer research skills.
> Students were also not allowed to use factors that could not be found
> on the Internet. With projects like this, time is taken away from
> exciting discussions and debates to spend more time using the
> computer.
>
> One teacher assigned supplemental work for students to do on the
> computer. “Isn’t this just extraneous busywork?” one astute student
> asked. “Yes,” the teacher replied, “but it practices computer skills.”
> Computer skills must be very important for students to learn. So many
> teachers and schools dedicate so much time to their learning — some
> schools even have classes dedicated to them. “The computer is a tool,”
> the schools explain, “one that students must learn to use properly.”
> However, a pencil is also a tool which must be used properly, yet how
> many schools have classes on the proper use of pencils? Students are
> expected to learn usage of such tools on their own or at a younger
> age. Yet the computer demands constant education and instruction on
> its usage. This instruction is far more than that demanded by any
> other tool.


The Sexual Life of Savages
==========================

October 16, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/savagesex)

* * * * *

In the early 1900s, anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski did his field
work in the Trobriand Islands of the Western Pacific. After getting
himself ashore, he dropped himself into their culture and begun having
to learn their language and understand their customs. The result were a
series of groundbreaking books in the field of anthropology, much of
which is still entertaining to read today.

In *The Sexual Life of Savages* (savages, Malinowski assures us, is a
technical term and not meant to cause offense) he describes the customs
of Trobriand’s intimate life, which is fascinating both for how it is
different and how it is the same.

To a certain degree, it seems like the culture of the islanders presages
our own. Back when Malinowski was doing his field work, he was amazed
that islanders could freely have premarital sex and yet still found it
desirable to get married. The same question would prove no puzzle to any
American today.

And, indeed, the islanders seem like a case study in the ultimate
consequences of the sexual revolution: girls want sex just as much as
guys, kids start having sex at a very young age — 6-8 for the girls and
10-12 for the guys — with no social stigma, there are few customs about
dating to inhibit “hooking up”, and, of course, revealing clothing has
been taken to its limit, with girls actually going topless.

Of course, much of the story of a Trobriand’s intimate life is the same:
initial attractions budding into lasting relationships, etc. And then,
out of nowhere, Malinowski drops in something totally bizarre. The
islanders don’t kiss, he explains. Instead, they scratch. The girls
scratch the guys so hard that they draw blood and, if the guys can
withstand the pain, then they move forward to having sex. The
ethnographer (as Malinowski calls himself) verified this by noting that
just about everyone on the island had noticeable scratches. And while
everybody is having sex whenever they want, premarital meal-sharing is a
big no-no. You’re not supposed to go out for dinner together until after
you get married.

But the most fascinating and strange part about the islanders are their
beliefs on the subject of pregnancy, also described in Malinowski’s
classic article “[Baloma: The Spirits of the Dead in the Trobriand
Islands](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/static/baloma.pdf)”. When people
die, you see, their spirit takes a canoe to the island of Tuma, which
works very much like the normal island except everybody is a spirit of
the dead. When the spirit gets old and wrinkled it shrugs off its skin
and turns back into an embryo, which a spirit then takes back to the
island and inserts into a woman. This, you see, is how women get
pregnant.

That’s right. The islanders do not believe that sex causes pregnancy.
They don’t believe in physiological fatherhood. Malinowski was
incredibly skeptical about this, so he tried all sorts of ways to see if
this was simply a story they told, while they actually the real deal.
But no, they assured him that it was really true, that all the white
people who insisted otherwise were being silly, that the spirits caused
pregnancy, not sex.

They argued the case quite logically. After all, they noted, one fellow
went on an expedition for a year or two and when he came back, he had a
new son. He obviously wasn’t having sex with her while he was away, so
where did the kid come from? (Cough.) And, they note, there are some
really hideous people on the island who nobody would dare have sex with,
yet they manage to become pregnant. (Malinowski spies some kids looking
sheepish when this subject is raised.)

They also argue the other way: people on the island are having sex all
the time from a very early age and yet they very rarely get pregnant.
(Naturally, the islanders don’t practice any form of contraception; the
very idea doesn’t make sense when sex doesn’t cause pregnancy.) The
white man’s argument just doesn’t make sense. Indeed, [recent visitors
report](http://www.travelintelligence.net/wsd/articles/art4print_520.html),
the islanders *still* believe that sex doesn’t cause pregnancy, despite
the best efforts of health workers.

It is speculated that the yams that form the basis of the island diet
have a contraceptive agent in them (The Pill was originally made by
looking at chemicals in wild yams), which conveniently explains quite a
bit, including the low birthrate despite the high level of sexual
activity. Indeed, the whole idea lends quite a bit of support to the
idea that material factors shape culture — after all, our own sexual
revolution didn’t happen until we got the yam’s chemicals in pill form
in 1960.

The notion has some other interesting consequences. For example, the
society is necessarily matrilineal, since fathers have no technical
lineage. Yet sociological fathers (the mother’s husband), Malinowski
notes, show more love and care for their children than most he’s seen in
Europe.

Furthermore, they believe the same rules apply to the rest of the animal
kingdom. This is what clinches it for Malinowski — despite all the
effort they go to to raise pigs, they insist that pigs also reproduce
asexually. They never attempt to breed pigs; indeed, they castrate all
the male pigs they have. (To them this is further proof — we castrated
all the pigs and yet they keep having children! Malinowski notes that
the domestic pigs often sneak off to canoodle with those in the wild.)

When I told a friend of mine about this odd state of affairs, he
wondered if the islanders were just stupid. After all, he noted, sex and
childbirth aren’t exactly two physically unconnected human activities.
But as he reflected on it further, he considered that this belief wasn’t
that much different from what passes for religion in our country. Smart
people believe strange things.


Talking Right
=============

October 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/talkingright)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_talkingright)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586483862)

Government, John Dewey famously said, is the shadow cast by big business
over society. And political language, Geoffrey Nunberg argues in
*Talking Right*, is the shadow cast by government. Democrats, he points
out, seem to think language has a talismanic power, that if only they
can find the right catch phrase or slogan, they can pull people over to
their side. “Liberal” must become “progressive”, “family values” must
become “valuing families”. There’s an intellectual cleverness to such
stunts, and as a Berkeley linguist, Nunberg must want to believe in
them. But he doesn’t. The words, he explains, are just a side-effect of
the larger political situation. Dewey explained that attempts to change
the shadow will have no effect without a change in the substance, and
Nunberg heartily agrees.

It’s hard to see how it could be otherwise, but Democrats have suffered
from a stubborn literalism in political discourse: thinking they can
beat the charge of big government by launching programs cutting down on
bureaucratic waste, thinking they can reclaim the issue of values by
pointing to their love of tolerance and fairness, thinking they can
dodge the charge of latte-sipping by donning a hunting cap and rifle. In
reality, the issues go much deeper: big government is an attack on the
notion that government can do good, values refers to a feeling of
national morals run amok, and the latte-sipping charge is an attempt to
distract voters from bigger issues of class. Nunberg even chastises his
colleague George Lakoff for assuming that the current packages of
political positions have any deeper meanings, rather than just being
accidents of history.

Nunberg is an essayist—his commentaries for NPR’s *Fresh Air* are a
national treasure—and his style, while eminently readable, doesn’t
translate well to a long book, where his points get lost in a field of
anecdotes. But beneath all the stories about how conservatives eat more
brie and liberal used to be a mantle claimed by everyone, Nunberg’s
point is a familiar one: if the Democrats want to win, they must begin
telling full-throated populist stories about how the economic elite are
capturing the wealth of our country and how we need government to take
it back. The point is no less true for being popular, and it’s
heartening to find that investigation from yet another perspective
yields the same conclusions.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586483862)


[image1_talkingright]: image1_talkingright.jpg

That Isn’t Science!
===================

October 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/psuedoscientism)

* * * * *

Larry Wall once noted that the scientificness of a field is inversely
correlated to how much the word “science” appears in its name. Physics,
of course, doesn’t have science in the name and is the most scientific
of all sciences. Then comes biology and and ethology and so on. Then
come the non-sciences like Computer Science and Poultry Science. And
worst of all is Scientology.

In general, whenever someone tells you that “science” has decreed that
you should do one thing or another that doesn’t seem reasonable, it’s
probably because they’re trying to pull one over on you, whether it’s
the “scientific” medicines you see on late-night TV or the science of
the behaviorists who say you shouldn’t love your kids.

But nowhere is this more evident than when people try to tell you what
science itself is. This field of meta-science seems to attract more
charlatans and malintents than any other. If you control how the very
notion of what’s scientific is defined — well, then that’s real power.
Even if the very idea is patently absurd. (A real scientist would never
tell you that doing X isn’t really science; their goal is to get the
truth, not sit around making rules about who’s in and who’s out.)

For much of the outside world, the test for a real science is
“falsifiability” — the possibility that there could be evidence proving
the claim wrong. This notion was invented by Karl Popper, who was
himself [an enemy of
science](http://www.geocities.com/Krishna_kunchith/dcs/popper/popper.html)
who tried to insist that science never actually made any progress, that
we never learned anything more about the world.

But even if we put aside this noxious pedigree, Popper’s definition is
still absurd. Take the distinction between astronomy and astrology. We
would all agree, I think, that the first is a science but the second
isn’t. But both of their predictions are equally falsifiable — astrology
makes a dozen falsifiable predictions in the newspaper five times a
week. Popper’s criteria isn’t of much help to us, even on such a basic
case.

Sadly, like many American intellectuals, the Supreme Court assumed that
falsifiability was a standard scientific test. In the *Daubert* case it,
[as Chris Mooney summarizes the view of the *American Journal of Public
Health*](http://www.prospect.org/web/page.ww?section=root&name=ViewWeb&articleId=10061),
“blundered miserably” and set judges the task of using this “deeply
confused philosophy of science” to act as gatekeepers in keeping
scientific claims from juries. Actual scientists like
[DefendingScience.org](http://defendingscience.org/) is working to undo
this these mistakes, but you wouldn’t know it from the rhetoric — after
all, *Daubert*’s defenders claim their just trying to uphold sound
scientific standards. (Chris Mooney’s book *The Republican War on
Science*, among others, has a fascinating exposé of the junk
science/sound science notions cooked up by the PR industry to trash
actual science. But that’s another subject.)

What are the real effects, though? Daubert was a parent whose child was
born with birth defects they believed were caused by the drug Benedictin
which, in animal studies, appeared to cause the defects they were
suffering. By making it harder for science to be presented in Court,
these kinds of rulings make it easier for drug companies to claim
there’s no “sound science” that they’re hurting anyone.

America isn’t alone, however. In Britain a group supporting what they
call “evidence-based medicine” is trying to tighten restrictions on what
experiments can be examined when approving drugs. Evidence-based
medicine? Who could be against that! But again, they’re playing the same
games. Behind evidence-based science are a bunch of very bizarre claims
about what science is and isn’t, taken not from doctors or scientists,
but from econometricians (the subspecialty of economics that has to do
with calculating things), which have quite a few problems of their own
when it comes to the subject of evidence.

Under “evidence-based medicine” rules, doctors aren’t allowed to
prescribe drugs on the basis of case studies and other reports; instead,
the only real evidence are large double-blind random controlled trials
whose results have a less than 5% probability of being due to chance.
(Why 5%? No good reason. But according to the EBM people anything more
than that isn’t evidence.)

Again, you have the same negative effects: when someone tries to claim
in court that a certain drug destroyed their life, the drug company can
claim that there’s no “evidence” to support this if the studies just
happen to be 94% likely instead of 95%, or if there’s only a series of
case studies instead of a controlled trial.

This isn’t evidence, this isn’t rationality, this isn’t science. Science
is about trying to get the truth about the world, using whatever
mechanisms are most effective at the job, whether you’re studying the
nature of planets in space or the nature of other cultures. When someone
tells you otherwise, tries to insist that technique X or subject Y
doesn’t deserve the name science, it’s probably because they’re trying
to pull a fast one on you.


Science Summaries
=================

October 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scisum)

* * * * *

Anybody who’s ever read so much as a Malcolm Gladwell article or an
Alfie Kohn book knows that science can be fascinating, that its attempts
at answering our questions not only can have a real impact on our lives
but are interesting in their own right. Wouldn’t it be great if there
was a place that reported these things?

If this exists, please tell me — I’d love to read it. But if it doesn’t,
I’d like to start one. Here’s the idea:

We have a bunch of contributors, each of whom reads a variety of
journals or journal summaries. When they come across an article that
seems particularly interesting, they write up a one or two paragraph
summary of the experiment and the findings aimed at an intelligent but
generalist audience along with a link to the actual article.

So here’s an example of what this might look like:

> Economists at Cornell and Indiana University tried to see if
> television causes autism. Thinking that rainfall could cause kids to
> watch more TV and thus induce autism, they looked at county-level data
> in California, Oregon, and Washington — states with high variability
> in rainfall — and found that autism was was correlated with rainfall
> (R\^2=.77). Thinking that the use of cable TV was another random
> variable that increased autism, they looked at similar data in
> California and Pennsylvania and found the use of cable TV correlated
> with autism (R\^2=.21).
> [[Paper](http://www.johnson.cornell.edu/faculty/profiles/waldman/autpaper.html)]

(I probably screwed up the R\^2 bit, but that’s why I’m looking for
other people to write these.) Of course, this particular study got lots
of media attention (that’s why I knew about it), but I’m hoping that
with enough contributors we’ll uncover interesting studies that don’t
make it into the general news.

So the contributors write a paragraph like this and send it in to an
editor, who posts it to a blog, where people can subscribe and comment
and so on like any other blog.

I’m happy to set up the blog and serve as the initial editor, so what I
really need are contributors. Do you read journals or other reports of
new science? If so, either post here (be sure to include your email so I
can contact you!) or email [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) with
a list of the journals or news sources you read and would be willing to
go thru.

Or, if you have comments on the idea, feel free to post those too.


The Invention of Objectivity
============================

October 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newobjectivity)

* * * * *

Big media pundits are always wringing their hands about how upstart
partisan bloggers are destroying the neutral objectivity our country was
founded on. (If there’s one thing pundits love to do, it’s
hand-wringing.) Without major papers giving everyone an objective view
of the facts, they insist, the very foundation of the republic is in
peril.

You can criticize this view for just being silly or wrong, and many
have, but there’s another problem with it: it’s completely ahistorical.
As Robert McChesney describes in *The Problem of the Media*, objectivity
is a fairly recent invention — the republic was actually founded on
partisan squabblers.

When our country was founded, newspapers were not neutral, non-partisan
outlets, but the products of particular political parties. The Whigs had
their paper, the Tories theirs, and both of which attacked their
political opponents with slurs that would make even the most
foul-mouthed bloggers blush. This behavior wasn’t just permitted — it
was encouraged.

You often hear the media quote Jefferson’s comment that “were it left to
me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, or
newspapers without government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer
the latter.” However, they hesitate to print the following sentence:
“But I should mean that every man should receive those papers, and be
capable of reading them.” In particular, Jefferson was referring to the
post office subsidy the government provided to the partisan press.

In 1794, newspapers made up 70% of post office traffic and the big
debate in Congress was not over whether the government should pay for
their delivery, but how much of it to pay for. James Madison attacked
the idea that newspaper publishers should have to pay even a token fee
to get the government to deliver their publications, calling it “an
insidious forerunner of something worse.” By 1832, newspaper traffic had
risen to make up 90% of all mail.

Indeed, objectivity wasn’t even invented until the 1900s. Before that,
McChesney comments, “such notions for the press would have been
nonsensical, even unthinkable.” Everyone assumed that the best system of
news was one where everyone could say their piece at very little cost.
(The analogy to blogging isn’t much of a stretch, now is it? See, James
Madison loved blogs!)

But as wealth began to concentrate in the Gilded Age and the commercial
presses began to lobby government for more favorable policies, the size
and power of the smaller presses began to dwindle. The commercial
presses were eager to be the only game in town, but they realized that
if they were, their blatant partisanship would have to go. (Nobody would
stand for a one-newspaper town if the one paper was blatantly biased.)
So they decided to insist that journalism was a profession like any
other, that reporting was an apolitical job, based solely on objective
standards.

They set up schools of journalism to train reporters in the new notion.
In 1900, there were no J-schools; by 1920, the major ones were going
strong. The “church and state” separation of advertising and reporting
became official doctrine and the American Society of Newspaper Editors
(ASNE) was set up to enforce it.

The entire foundation of press criticism was rebuilt. Now, instead of
criticizing papers for the bias of their owners, press critics had to
focus on the professional obligations of their writers. Bias wasn’t
about the slant of a paper’s focus, but about any slanting put in by a
reporter.

So that was the line of attack the house press critics took when the
world of weblogs brought back the vibrant political debates of our
country’s founding. “These guys are biased! Irresponsible! They get
their facts wrong! They’re unprofessional!” they squeal. Look, guys.
Tell that to James Madison.


I Hate the News
===============

October 20, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hatethenews)

* * * * *

Some people start their day by reading *The New York Times*. Others end
it by watching the nightly news. Some get it from *The Daily Show*.
Others download it from a variety weblogs. Some keep up-to-the-minute by
following CNN. Others have instant news updates automatically text
messaged to their phone. But everybody seems to agree: it’s a citizen’s
responsibility to keep up with the news. Everybody except me.

I think following the news is a waste of time.

Some people agree with me on a small scale. Some point out that the
cable channels are obsessed with bizarre crimes that have little larger
impact, that they worry too much about horse-race coverage of politics,
that too much of the news is filled with PR-inserted nonsense. But they
do this because they think these are aberrations; that underneath all
this, the news is worth saving. I simply go one step further: I think
none of it is worthwhile.

Let us look at the front page of today’s *New York Times*, the gold
standard in news. In the top spot there is a story about Republicans
feuding among themselves. There is a photo of soldiers in Iraq. A stock
exchange chief must return \$100M. There is a concern about some doctors
over-selling a nerve testing system. There is a threat from China
against North Korea. There is a report that violence in Iraq is rising.
And there is concern about virtual science classes replacing real ones.

None of these stories have relevance to my life. Reading them may be
enjoyable, but it’s an enjoyable waste of time. They will have no impact
on my actions one way or another.

Most people will usually generally concede this point, but suggest that
there’s something virtuous about knowing it anyway, that it makes me a
better citizen. They point out that newspapers are a key part of our
democracy, that by exposing wrong-doing to the people, they force the
wrong-doers to stop.

This seems to be true, but the curious thing is that I’m never involved.
The government commits a crime, the *New York Times* prints it on the
front page, the people on the cable chat shows foam at the mouth about
it, the government apologizes and commits the crime more subtly. It’s a
valuable system — I certainly support the government being more subtle
about committing crimes (well, for the sake of argument, at least) — but
you notice how it never involves me? It seems like the whole thing would
work just as well even if nobody ever read the *Times* or watched the
cable chat shows. It’s a closed system.

There is voting, of course, but to become an informed voter all one
needs to do is read a short guide about the candidates and issues before
the election. There’s no need to have to suffer through the daily
back-and-forth of allegations and counter-allegations, of scurrilous
lies and their refutations. Indeed, reading a voter’s guide is much
better: there’s no recency bias (where you only remember the crimes
reported in the past couple months), you get to hear both sides of the
story after the investigation has died down, you can actually think
about the issues instead of worrying about the politics.

Others say that sure, most of the stuff in the news isn’t of use, but
occasionally you’ll come across some story that will lead you to
actually change what you’ve been working on. But really, how plausible
is this? Most people’s major life changes don’t come from reading an
article in the newspaper; they come from reading longer-form essays or
thoughtful books, which are much more convincing and detailed.

Which brings me to my second example of people agreeing with me on the
small scale. You’ll often hear TV critics say that CNN’s
up-to-the-minute reporting is absurd. Instead of saying, “We have
unconfirmed reports that—This just in! We now have confirmed reports
that those unconfirmed reports have been denied. No, wait! There’s a new
report denying the confirmation of the denial of the unconfirmed
report.” and giving viewers whiplash, they suggest that the reporters
simply wait until a story is confirmed before reporting it and do
commentary in the meantime.

But if that’s true on a scale of minutes, why longer? Instead of
watching hourly updates, why not read a daily paper? Instead of reading
the back and forth of a daily, why not read [a weekly
review](http://harpers.org/WeeklyReview.html)? Instead of a weekly
review, why not read a monthly magazine? Instead of a monthly magazine,
why not read an annual book?

With the time people waste reading a newspaper every day, they could
have read an entire book about most subjects covered and thereby learned
about it with far more detail and far more impact than the daily doses
they get dribbled out by the paper. But people, of course, wouldn’t read
a book about most subjects covered in the paper, because most of them
are simply irrelevant.

But finally, I’d like to argue that following the news isn’t just a
waste of time, it’s actively unhealthy. Edward Tufte notes that when he
used to read the *New York Times* in the morning, it scrambled his brain
with so many different topics that he couldn’t get any real intellectual
work done the rest of the day.

The news’s obsession with having a little bit of information on a wide
variety of subjects means that it actually gets most of those subjects
wrong. (One need only read the blatant errors reported in the
corrections page to get some sense of the more thorough-going errors
that must lie beneath them. And, indeed, anyone who has ever been in the
news will tell you that the news always gets the story wrong.) Its
obsession with the criminal and the deviant makes us less trusting
people. Its obsession with the hurry of the day-to-day makes us less
reflective thinkers. Its obsession with surfaces makes us shallow.

This is not simply an essay meant to provoke; I genuinely believe what I
write. I have not followed the news at least since I was 13 (with
occasional lapses on particular topics). My life does not seem to be
impoverished for it; indeed, I think it has been greatly enhanced. But I
haven’t found many other people who are willing to take the plunge.


The Archives
============

October 22, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/archive)

* * * * *

**[What is going on here?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/about)**

politics and parody
-------------------

-   [Comprehensive Response to All Arguments Against Gay
    Marriage](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001037)
-   [Our Brave Censors](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001085)
-   [Contest: What has Bush Done for
    You](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001103)
-   [Counterpoint: Downloading Isn’t
    Stealing](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001112)
-   [Jefferson: Nature Wants Information to Be
    Free](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001115)
-   [Bush Fear](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001119)
-   [Sue For Freedom: Saving Steamboat
    Roy](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001179)
-   [President Bush: Why Can’t He Stop
    Lying](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001188)
-   [[REDACTED]](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001225)
-   [Gerrymandering: How Politicans Steal Votes and You Can Return
    Them](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001171)
-   [Up is Down: How Stating the False Hides the
    True](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001173)
-   [Watch the Comedians: The Daily
    Show](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001347)
-   [Why is Big Media Losing Viewers? (Hint: Because it
    sucks.)](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001397)
-   [Intellectual Diversity at
    Stanford](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001588)
-   [The Republican Playbook](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001599)
-   [The Case Against Lawrence
    Summers](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001606)
-   [The Truth About the Drug
    Companies](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001626)
-   [Change of Course](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/newethics)
-   [Paul Graham is Wrong](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/pgwrong)
-   [The New McCarthy: Bill
    O’Reilly](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/newmccarthy)
-   [Trials of Testing](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/personalitytests)
-   [Understanding Economic
    Jargon](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/understandingeconomics)
-   [In His Own Words 2](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/mlk2)
-   [More MLKJ Day](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/mlk22)
-   [Legal Bribes: A Public Service
    Announcement](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/legalbribes)
-   [Shifting the Terms of Debate: Inside Right-Wing Think
    Tanks](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1)
-   [The Attraction of the
    Center](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whycentrism)
-   [Alone in the Hospital](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitalbabies)
-   [Fashion Notes](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/fashionnotes)
-   [The Invention of
    Objectivity](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/newobjectivity)

thought
-------

-   [The Intentionality of
    Evil](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil)
-   [Serious Social Science](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/socialscience)
-   [HOWTO: Be more productive](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity)
-   [Say Goodbye to Embarrassment](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/emotions)
-   [What It Means To Be An
    Intellectual](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intellectuals)
-   [A Non-Programmer’s Apology](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/nonapology)
-   [Legacy](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/legacy)
-   [In Offense of Classical
    Music](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/classicalmusic)
-   [The Hard Sciences](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/hardscience)
-   [What Makes a Personality
    Scary?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/scarypeople)
-   [I Love the University](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingmit)
-   [Nutrition Basics](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/basicnutrition)
-   [Simple Tips for Longer
    Living](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/healthytips)
-   [The Smalltalk Question](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/smalltalkq)
-   [A Unified Theory of
    Magazines](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/unifiedmagazines)
-   [Take the Easy Way Out](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/easywayout)
-   [The Awfulness of College
    Lectures](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/awfullectures)
-   [The Greatness of College
    Lectures](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/greatlectures)
-   [College: Commodity or
    Community?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/collegecommunity)
-   [Getting it Wrong](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingitwrong)
-   [Getting it Right: Towards a Theory of Graduated
    Achievement](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingitright)
-   [Science Summaries](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/scisum)
-   [I Hate the News](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/hatethenews)

reviews
-------

-   [PowerPoint Remix](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000931)
-   [Cat in the Hat: Harmful to
    Minors](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001113)
-   [Fahrenheit 9/11 Transcript: The Saudi
    Flights](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001375)
-   [Philip Zimbardo on the Psychology of
    Evil](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001450)
-   [Fraud In Science](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001616)
-   [David M. Clark on Cognitive
    Therapy](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001639)
-   [Social Class in America](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001686)
-   [Freakonomics](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001688)
-   [Alfie Kohn on Incentives and
    Parenting](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001689)
-   [The God Who Wasn’t There (And The One Who
    Was)](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/thegodmovie)
-   [The Immorality of
    Freakonomics](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/immoralfreaks)
-   [Our Next Superjumbo](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/superjumbo)
-   [Behind the Rant: Maciej
    Ceglowski](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/ceglowski-interview)
-   [Reflections on Cultural
    Fragments](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/cultfrags)
-   [The Republican War on Science](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/gopwar)
-   [Serenity](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/serenity)
-   [Serenity: A Review](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/serenity2)
-   [David Lynch and Vedic “Science”](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dlynch)
-   [Colombia is Bleeding](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/colombiaisbleeding)
-   [The Disappearance of Thought](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/postmankid)
-   [Do Faces Cause Depression?: Self-Experimentation in
    Science](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/facedepress)
-   [The Miracle Diet](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet)
-   [A Future Without Fat](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture)
-   [Fat Backlash](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/fatbacklash)
-   [The Book That Changed My Life](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/epiphany)
-   [The Conservative Nanny State](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/cns)
-   [An Inconvenient Truth](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/inconvenient)
-   [What’s Freedom?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whosefreedom)
-   [What’s Radical About the Liberal
    Arts?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/radicalarts)
-   [Mamet on Auditions](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/mametacting)
-   [iz r childrens
    lrnng?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverlearning)
-   [Blast from the Past](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/schooltool)
-   [The Sexual Life of Savages](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/savagesex)
-   [Talking Right](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/talkingright)

diary
-----

-   [LarryL and AaronSw](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000291)
-   [Trip Notes](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000647)
-   [Mr. Swartz Goes to Washington](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000650)
-   [Eye Exercises](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001083)
-   [SFP: Come see us](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001679)
-   [SFP: Home, Sweet, Home](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/sfp-apt)
-   [Stanford/SFP: Leaving on a Jet
    Plane](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/stanford2sfp)
-   [SFP: First Contact](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/sfpmtg1)
-   [SFP: Dinner with Dan](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dinnerwdan)
-   [SFP: Fire Alarm](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/mitfirealarm)
-   [Of Washington And
    Worcester](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/downhillbattle)
-   [SFP: The Spirit Inside](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/july4)
-   [Simon Arrives](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/simon)
-   [iCommons Summit](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/icommons)
-   [Eat and Code](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/eatandcode)
-   [FOO Camp](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/foo3)
-   [Founders Unite for Startup
    School](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/startupschool)
-   [Life in Suburbia: Land of
    Cliche](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/suburbia)
-   [On Losing Weight](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/losingweight)
-   [Solidarity for the Shy: Achieving Critical
    Mass](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/critmass)
-   [of the MBTA](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/ofthembta)
-   [A Feminist Goes to the Hospital](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/femhosp)
-   [Life in the Hospital](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitallife)
-   [Visiting Mission Hill](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/missionhill)
-   [Visiting Olin College](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingolin)

tech
----

-   [License Haiku](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000360)
-   [Bake, Don’t Fry](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000404)
-   [The Road to RSS 3.0](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000574)
-   [Privacy, Accuracy, Security: Pick Two — The Problems with
    Compulsory Licensing](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001016)
-   [Fixing Compulsory Licensing](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001036)
-   [Postel’s Law Has No Exceptions](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001025)
-   [Up With Facts: Finding the Truth in
    WikiCourt](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/001175)
-   [Rewriting Reddit](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rewritingreddit)
-   [A Brief History of Ajax](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/ajaxhistory)
-   [Release Late, Release Rarely](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rlrr)
-   [The Fruits of Mass
    Collaboration](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab)
-   [The Techniques of Mass Collaboration: A Third Way
    Out](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab2)
-   [What Does Blogspace Look Like?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/blogviz)
-   [Growth](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikigrowth)
-   [Wikimedia at the Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)
-   [Who Writes
    Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)
-   [Who Writes Wikipedia? —
    Responses](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments)
-   [False Outliers](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/writefp)
-   [Who Runs Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)
-   [Making More Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)
-   [Making More Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)
-   [Code, and Other Laws of
    Wikipedia](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)
-   [(The Dandy Warhols) Come Down](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/comedown)

administrivia
-------------

-   [Aaron joins Creative Commons as RDF
    Advisor](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/000174)
-   [What’s Going On Here?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whaaaa)
-   [Getting Back On Track](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/metamake)
-   [Help Wanted: Programmers for
    Startup](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/helpwanted)
-   [Faces of Fame](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/myface)
-   [Narcissism Notice](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/narc)
-   [The Startup News](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/thestartupnews)
-   [Birthday Thoughts](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/birthdaythoughts)
-   [Some Announcements](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/webproductivity)
-   [Wassup?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wassup)
-   [Book Reviews](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/amareview)
-   [Introducing feeds.reddit](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/feedit)
-   [Gmail Down](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/gmaildown)
-   [A Clarification](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/clarifying)
-   [Weekend Update](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/comedown2)

**Even more:** [Full archives](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/fullarchive)


A Night at the Coop
===================

October 24, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/coopnight)

* * * * *

*This story is only what it is. It is not meant to be representative of
any other experience.*

The other year, when I was [living in a
cabinet](http://www.flickr.com/photos/33809408@N00/150538078/), someone
emailed me to ask if I had found a decent place to stay. “Oh, don’t
worry,” I said. “I’m sleeping outside the Coop.”

For those who don’t know Cambridge, the Coop is the Harvard-affiliated
bookstore in the center of town. It has an odd sort of recessed
entrance, that means there’s plenty of outside-but-sheltered space to
sleep at night and anyone who walks through the town late at night sees
many (presumably homeless) people in sleeping bags taking advantage of
it.

She didn’t believe my claim for a second and ever since that’s always
irked me. Why is it so unbelievable that I might live beneath the Coop?
It’s got a fantastic location (Harvard Square is perhaps my favorite
place in the world), nice atmosphere, and plenty of neighbors. Is a
person like me living there really so improbable?

So ever since, I’ve had it in the back of my mind that I would spend a
night at the Coop. The opportunity finally arose last week, when I
finally got my hands on a decent sleeping bag.

I made meticulous preparations. I took the bag and rolled it around in
the dirt to scuff it up a big, so it didn’t stand out so much (this
really didn’t do a whole lot, to be honest). Then I changed into
sweatpants and a non-descript T-shirt. I left my shoes but put on a
couple layers of socks, two subway fares and my keys. I buried the keys
in a park by my house, spent one fare getting to Harvard Square, buried
the other one inside Harvard, and then took my sleeping bag to a spot
outside the Coop.

The digital clock hovering over us read exactly 10:00.

A musician was performing directly outside the Coop. He was quite good,
sold a couple CDs, and encouraged people to visit his website. In
between songs, he’d make odd jokes about songs about his lack of a
girlfriend. He chatted with a less coherent fellow on a bicycle who rode
by sometimes.

There was a man in an orange jacket who really got into dancing to the
music, before he finally took his place on a mat outside the Coop.
Another man with a green sleeping bag turned in. I watched the big
crimson flags outside the store wave, marvelling at their beauty.

Around 11 a whole group of kids blew through the square, seeming
somewhat drunk and laughing. Little snippets of conversation could be
heard.

That’s one odd thing about Harvard Square. If you sit at in the square
and listen to people, you hear them talking about boys and homework.
Meanwhile, I ordered breakfast once at a dingy little shop here in Davis
Square, Somerville, and the girl behind the counter was arguing with the
two older cooks about how the welfare policies of socialist countries
affect their marriage rates, doing it as if it was the most natural
thing in the world. After that, Harvard students really don’t impress
me.

Around 11:30 it was getting pretty empty and the musician began packing
up his stuff. I didn’t last much longer, so I laid my sleeping bag out
along the side of the Coop and climbed inside. There were about five or
six people on the other side, all tiled in nicely with each other, all
in a different sort of gear.

I drifted in and out of consciousness for a bit, heard odd noises going
past us on the street. Finally, I fell asleep around midnight (my usual
bedtime), and didn’t wake up until 5am when a subway train rolled
underneath me. Everyone was still there, the day was still dark and
quiet. I wanted to watch the sunrise but fell back asleep and didn’t
wake up until 8, by which time the sun had most certainly risen and
everyone else had left. It had apparently rained overnight, because the
ground was thoroughly soaked, and I tried to avoid the puddles as I went
to dig out my subway fare.

It was right where I left it and I got onto the train without incident.
My keys were where I left them as well and I managed to get into the
apartment just in time for work.

*What was so hard about that?*, I thought.


Somerville’s Oddest Park
========================

October 25, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/oddpark)

* * * * *

Behind one of the exits of the Davis Square T station is a small grassy
area that connects the T station to a long trail that stretches from
Medford to Bedford. (To accomplish this feat, the trail makes some
bizarre choices, like going right through the middle of the cities
busiest streets and public squares.) To all appearances, the area is
completely unremarkable — some grass, a grate, a few pillars, an odd
sculpture. But if you look up, a bizarre exhibit is laid out in the sky.

The pillars, you see, stop above eye level and then continue upwards
with poles. Atop the poles are sculptures, model replicas of important
Somerville buildings and things. And at the entrance, soaring overhead,
where no one ever looks, is an enormous sign: Seven Hills Park,
Somerville. And next to it is a large cow sitting on a compass.

The whole park is filled with this kind of gag. On each pillar is a sign
describing the replica that sits atop it. One gushes about a particular
building’s importance to the Revolutionary War, then describes what
happens to it. First it was sold to a mental asylum (albeit one [for the
stars](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McLean_Hospital)), then the asylum
moved and abandoned it. Then the building was razed. And then the entire
hill it sat on was razed and turned into a landfill. Every pillar has a
story like this: important landmark, cut down by human folly.

Then there are the sculptures. The sculptures are life-size replicas of
people in everyday poses — sitting on the bench, standing with their
coat folded over their arm, and so on — placed right in the middle of
things as if they were real. So the first surprise is that the people
who seem real are really sculptures and that the sculptures aren’t set
off with signs or space but thrown in with everything else.

So then you admire the happy poses of the sculptures before you notice
another oddity: everyone in the sculptures is wearing a mask over their
face. Still, the faces all seem like happy ones, until you look at them
more carefully. A father appears to gaze down lovingly at the infant son
in his arms, until you look more closely, and you see that he’s not
looking at his son at all. He’s staring at the ground at the gaze of
love is really more one of wistfulness — he’s imagining he was somewhere
else right now; somewhere nice.

In another, two parents look down at their son in what first appears to
be admiration but on further inspection is more like shock. And shock
seems appropriate, because the kid who appears to be their son is
dressed up in a bizarre costume of suspenders and is stretching his arms
like he’s about to go build a railroad. I still don’t know what in the
world is going on with that one. It freaks me out every time I walk by.

It’s weird having sculptures you can just hang out with like this. You
can sit on the bench next to a woman hugging her small child. And you
can look right into her face, get right into her space, get closer than
you ever could if she were real, analyze her gaze in far more detail
than would be polite in public.

And perhaps this is the real message of the statues, and the park:
Things are always much more complicated than they first seem, and you
can see it if you look closely, it’s just that we’re all to busy to
notice. Nobody ever looks up.


Google and the Gradient
=======================

October 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googradient)

* * * * *

For a long time it seemed like everything I heard about Google was even
cooler than the last. Wow, it’s a great search engine! Wow, they’re not
sleazy like other companies! Wow, they treat their hackers well! Wow,
they *are* hackers!

The feeling peaked sometime last year when I was almost rolling on the
floor hoping to work at Google. And I do mean peaked. Everything I’ve
heard since then has been downhill, each time I hear about it Google
seems less cool. I’m not saying the company is imminently doomed or that
you should sell your shares, but I definitely don’t think it’s going to
get any cooler.

Google is run like a socialist state. Its citizens are treated extremely
well. There’s free food, free doctors, free massages, free games, a
limited workweek, etc. There are ministries to give projects free
promotion and support. The government tries to avoid getting too much in
people’s lives. And Google is always coming up with more perks to give
away. (There’s also a strong class hierarchy, with abused temps and
powerful acquirees.)

The problem with a system like this is that it’s necessarily a bubble.
Everybody inside gets treated grandly, but the outside world gets
nothing. Indeed, because of Google’s notorious secrecy, they barely even
get to talk to the people inside. A friend who’s a prominent free
software developer says that every community member who’s joined Google
has stopped contributing to public projects. It’s so bad, he says, that
they’re thinking of banning Google from buying a booth at their next
conference. They can’t afford to lose any more developers.

Which means that Google has to be careful about who they hire, but since
they’re growing so fast they need to [hire people as quickly as
possible](http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB116156296729900433.html).
It’s an impossible bind — you can hire lots of people or you can hire
really good people, but even a company as prominent as Google is going
to have a hard time doing both.

The solution, of course, is to pop the bubble. There’s no reason being
part of Google has to be a binary decision. Google has a wide variety of
resources and while there are some they can’t really give away to
everyone (e.g. massages), there are others that should be easy (e.g.
servers). Unfortunately for them, Google’s mindset is so obviously set
that this will never happen. Even a company as woeful as Amazon is
already kicking their but in this space, giving away storage space and
computer power, with more in the works.

But let’s imagine you had the resources to do this right, what would you
do? (I feel like I’m giving away a valuable secret here, but since
nobody listens to me anyway, I doubt it will make any difference.) The
right thing is to build not a bubble, with it’s binary in-or-out choice,
but to build a gradient, with shades of resources you make available as
people achieve success.

So you have this organization dedicated to building cool web apps. The
first thing you do is you start giving away free food in the middle of
San Francisco. You have a nice cozy area with tables and bathrooms and
Wi-Fi and anyone interested in starting a web site is encouraged to drop
by and hang out. There they can eat, chat, hack, get feedback, get
suggestions, get help.

Then you give them free hosting. Servers and bandwidth are cheap, good
projects are invaluable. But not only will you host their app for free,
throwing in servers to scale it as necessary, but you’ll *pay* them for
the privilege of hosting. Indeed, you’ll pay them proportionately to the
amount of traffic they get, in exchange for the right to run ads on it
someday.

So now you’ve got all the bright, smart young things who want to start
companies starting them on your servers, with clear and unambiguous
incentives: get traffic, get paid. They don’t need to worry about
impressing anyone with their idea; anyone can use the hosting. And they
don’t need to sell out to investors anymore; as their traffic grows,
you’ll already be giving them the cash to grow the business.

Most of these sites, of course, will probably be failures. But who
cares? Sites that don’t get much traffic don’t use up much in the way of
resources. Meanwhile, a couple of the sites will actually take off. So
what do you do with those? *Give them more resources.*

Put your promotional team behind them to spread the word about the
ideas. Have your web designers, database jockeys, and JavaScript
hotshots help them fix up the site. Encourage promising young
programmers interested in helping out with something to write a feature
or two.

And — this is where the gradient comes in — as they become more
successful, you give them more resources. Let them move into the
apartment building above to food/hangout space, so they can get more
facetime with fellow successful hackers. Give them free offices to work
in. Provide free massages and exercise equipment. Have your PR team set
up interviews with the major media. Integrate their site with your other
sites. Plus, of course, they’re getting paid more for more traffic the
whole time.

Some of the sites will be huge hits, another YouTube or Facebook. The
founders will be raking in millions from the traffic. And at some point,
they’ll get tired of running the site and they’ll let it go. You’ll be
there to take it over, slap some ads on it to recoup the investment, and
give it to some new, junior developers to maintain and improve. And the
cycle continues.

(Bonus for the truly adventurous: run the whole thing as a non-profit
and have all the applications involved be open source.)

A bubble like Google can hire only so many people and there’s no way of
picking only the ones which will be successes. But everyone can be part
of a gradient and the successes simply rise to the top. I know which one
I’d work for.

*Thanks to Emmett Shear for discussion and suggestions.*


Founder’s Syndrome
==================

October 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/founderssyndrome)

* * * * *

The simplest way to do something, of course, is to do it yourself. But
there’s lots of stuff to be done and not enough you to do it. You can
get around this a little bit by finding friends who are interested in
doing some of it themselves, but at some point you’re going to have to
start “delegating”, or getting somebody else to do it.

Now you’re moving up in the world. If you’re a decent manager, instead
of running one project, you can run five or ten. Instead of simply
directing your own labor, you can direct whole groups of people. Of
course, it’ll still be people doing what you wanted, but — funny thing —
people are smart enough that they’ll begin to get the gist of things on
their own and, if you do it right, your delegation will become an
organization. You can disappear for a week and things will keep on
marching.

But make no mistake, even those organizations are still following the
will of their erstwhile founder. Even as they get big, they betray
facets of the founder’s personality. The most obvious is in who is
respected. My friend Emmett Shear has a theory that in each company only
one class of people can be in charge and it’s going to be the class of
people the founders are in. At Apple, for example, the UI designers are
in charge, because Jobs obsesses over UI design. At Google, it’s the
programmers, because Larry and Sergey used to code. Even though the
founders aren’t directly involved in every project, their surrogates
still win the day.

Now the problem comes when the organization wants to grow beyond its
founder. This is most common on non-profits, where they even have a name
for it: founder’s syndrome. See, once you have all these people carrying
out your bidding, it’s pretty difficult to want to give that up. Maybe
you can have them do more projects, maybe you can give them more
flexibility in what they choose, but I can’t think of a single story
where the guy in charge voluntarily gave up his power. And that has a
severe cost (which I’ve come to calling the “power premium”) because
giving up your power is often the right thing to do.

In non-profits, for example, your organization is probably made up of a
bunch of independent-minded young people with a strong belief in
democracy. These people aren’t too happy being told what to do all the
time, especially when the instructions are pretty obviously not the best
thing for the non-profit’s mission. So they rebel against the founder,
and the founder tries to hold on to power, and things get very messy. (I
don’t know how things usually turn out in this situation. Maybe you
fight until the founder dies?)

Less well noticed is that the same mistake is made by for-profit
corporations as well, it’s just less obvious because the founder is the
fellow holding all the cash, so you fight about it at your peril. But
companies regularly do stupid things, even when if you asked all the
people in the company about it they would have told you they were
stupid. But in a capitalist economy, the founder has to maintain
control.

But the power premium has a even more serious cost. While many people
seem to be able to make the leap from doing something themselves to
building an organization to do it, nobody seems to have been very good
at taking the next step: going from an organization to a
meta-organization, an organization that hires other organizations to do
its work, rather than hiring people directly.

Why? Partly because few people get to be in charge of something the size
of Google, where they need to take that next step to grow, and perhaps
the trait of thinking that big is rare. But I think part of it is simply
because the people at the top can’t give up their power. Engaging
organizations means you’re no longer in charge of what people do or how
they do it; the organizations have to be in charge of that. And that
means you’re no longer a delegator, but more of a moderator. It’s
founder’s syndrome at the largest scale.


What is Elitism?
================

October 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whatselitist)

* * * * *

This week’s Sunday Bonus Post [comes from local genius Kragen
Sitaker](http://lists.canonical.org/pipermail/kragen-tol/2006-October/000831.html).

Upon reading an article that claimed:

> [S]cience is hard. It is therefore inherently “elitist,” merely in
> this obvious sense: as with skateboarding, some will be demonstrably
> better at it than others.

Kragen saw fit to ponder the meaning of elitism. Kragen thinks of
himself as an anti-elitist, but he’s also very pro-science. How to
reconcile the two?

Kragen begins by defining “elite”:

> An “elite” is a small group of people who are distinguished from the
> majority in one of two ways: either they are better in some way, or
> they have more power. These are distinct meanings, although apologists
> for established orders like to conflate them, and sometimes one leads
> to the other. Sometimes an elite is distinguished by the mastery of a
> particular skill, such as skateboarding or mathematics, and sometimes
> by past accomplishments; but the much more common sense of the term
> today is to refer to a group of people who have power.

Elitism, then (according to Kragen) is the ideology that insists that
the elite and non-elite reached their positions through intrinsic merit.
(This belief might also be called meritocracy, but that is perhaps a
less pejorative term.)

Ironically, the very article that begun this investigation appears to
believe in this ideology. The article claims that textbooks, in trying
to be “democratic”, lower their standards so that even the dullest
students can comprehend them. Instead, the article insists, textbooks
must be more “elitist” and teach real science, which is hard.

Anti-elitists like Kragen and I would agree that textbooks should teach
more real science, which is hard. But we do not consider this elitist,
because we do not believe that only a small elite has the capability of
comprehending physics.

To anti-elitists, egalitarianism does not require lowering standards,
since we believe more people can reach higher standards with more
resources. But to elitists, this seems an impossibility. The only reason
they are in the club is because they deserve it; to let others in
requires bringing the requirements down.


Up Against Love
===============

October 30, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/againstlove)

* * * * *

[![](image1_againstlove)](http://aaronsw.com/go/0375421890)

When Laura Kipnis’s *Against Love: A Polemic* came out, reviewers seemed
to have trouble understanding what it was about. *Library Journal*
claimed it skewered “our relationship foibles”, the *New York Observer*
insisted it was an “incisive tract in praise of adultery”, and the
usually-reliable [*Salon* called
it](http://dir.salon.com/story/books/feature/2003/08/13/kipnis/index.html)
“a ‘defense’ of adultery”
([twice!](http://www.salon.com/books/review/2006/10/18/kipnis/)).

*Against Love* is a defense of adultery like *Capital* is a defense of
playing hooky. No, Kipnis’s aim is to dismantle the entire social
institution of, well, love — the notion that the right, meaningful, and
deeply human way to behave is to find one’s perfect soulmate by the time
school ends and then spend the rest of your life living, having sex, and
sharing your feelings with them. Kipnis thinks the whole thing is crazy,
a justification for locking people up in “domestic gulags”.

It’s pretty safe these days to get up and say our school systems are
crumbling, our borders are shot, our government is a mess, our voting
system is broken, or even that our economic system needs an overhaul.
But try criticizing our system of love and all you’ll get back is
stunned silence. Love is “the one subject where no disagreement will be
entertained, about which one truth alone is permissible” (4). So
criticisms, unspeakable in plain form, are disguised as the content of
our comedy (take my wife please!) and the subtext of our films (*The
Stepford Wives*, *Rosemary’s Baby*).

Despite the fact that most long-term relationships fall apart, nobody
suggests it’s the idea of a long-term relationship that’s the problem.
Instead we’re told that lasting relationships require “hard work”. So
you go to work and put in some hard work and then come home and put in
some more. Or maybe you spend more time at the office to avoid having to
come home. Or maybe you channel your unfulfilled passion into shopping.
Either way, capitalism wins.

We love to brag that we’ve achieved genuine freedom in our romantic
lives, laughing at those barbaric Muslims with their arranged marriages.
But is our system that much different? Careful studies find that people
have a suspiciously accurate habit of pairing up with people with a
similar level of attractiveness and wealth (although sometimes an excess
of one can compensate for a lack of the other). And then they promise to
live with each other forever, to working to make it work. Sure, perhaps
you get a little more latitude in picking your partner, but is this
system really that different?

Most people don’t see love as a system to be criticized, but they do
feel the social straitjacket even if they assume it’s just the “natural”
way relationships work out. And they begin looking for an escape. Kipnis
points to two: murder (“lethal intimate violence” — killing your lover —
is so popular that there’s an entire category in the crime statistics
for it) and adultery (its popularity needs no statistics). Kipnis shies
away from explicitly defending either (take that, *Salon*!), but she
does suggest that adultery is a little bit of radical activism against
the system, the critical practice of love.

She notes self-action generally comes before self-knowledge in these
things; workers had walk-outs before they had unions. In the same way,
the prevalence of adultery is people’s individualized attempt at
escaping from love, each one sneaking out for an affair, stealing time
from work at work and work at home to embrace their feelings.

But it isn’t just capitalism, with its pro-love informercials and
television specials, that tries to fit us to the system; the government
gets into the act too. Politicians lecture us about family values,
before sneaking out to cheat on their wives; states tie legal marriage
to thousands of benefits, making submission to its notions of monogamy a
prerequisite for perks. (Try to have several wives, like some folks in
Utah, and you’ll find yourself in jail — not to mention the laws against
adultery still on the books in 45 states.) And just imagine what it was
like before no-fault divorce, when you actually had to prove to the
government that you deserved to be unmarried, “as if it were an injured
lover refusing to let go once things were over” (172).

Kipnis doesn’t propose any particular solution; she just wants to ask
the question. The book is written in the style of the postmodern
bombthrower, with far more meat than most books of such form, although
sometimes the style’s excesses get a little too heavy. The book’s
argument is studded with references to Freud and Marx and Marcuse, but
done in such a flip and enjoyable way (and with thumbnail sketches of
their love lives) that it feels like gossip, not scholarship.

But perhaps the best bits are the poetic descriptions of what it’s like
to be in love, from how you “find[] yourself so voluptuously hurtled
into a state of possibility, a destabilizing,
might-be-the-start-of-something kind of moment. […] that first nervous
phone call, coffee, or a drink, or—circumstances permitting—an
incredible all-night marathon conversation” (7) to the “‘opening up’
required for relationship health [… which] will leave you feeling
somewhat vulnerable, lying there psychically spread-eagled, exposed, and
shivering on the examining table of your relationship” (76).

The book is a *tour de force* of writing, but even if it was dreadful,
it’d still be worth it. What other book covers these topics, changes the
way you look at love?

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375421890)


[image1_againstlove]: image1_againstlove.jpg

And Now, The News
=================

October 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bignews)

* * * * *

My company was acquired today.

*Friends in Cambridge:* we’ll be hanging out [at Border
Cafe](http://www.bordercafe.com/cambridge.html) tonight.

-   [TechCrunch](http://www.techcrunch.com/2006/10/31/breaking-news-conde-nastwired-acquires-reddit/)
    ([reddit](http://reddit.com/info/olu8/comments)): “always played
    second fiddle to Digg”

-   [Reddit Blog](http://reddit.com/blog/trickortreat): “you all have
    made it everything that it is. A number of you even stuck with us
    after we switched away from Lisp.”

-   [E-Consultancy.com](http://www.e-consultancy.com/news-blog/362018/reddit-acquired-by-conde-nast-to-join-wired-digital.html):
    “suggest[s] that we’re in a serious period of inflation, though
    let’s stop short of calling this a bubble.”

-   [Matthew
    Roche](http://www.landingpageoptimization.com/2006/10/the_medium_is_t.html):
    “the Avis Rent-a-car of the content voting sites.”

-   [David
    Weinberger](http://www.hyperorg.com/blogger/mtarchive/reddit_acquired.html):
    ” a very very smart move by CondeNet…if they let the Reddit folks
    heavily influence how the service is developed.”

-   [Blake
    Killian](http://www.voodooventures.com/2006/10/31/conde-nast-buys-redditcom-but-have-you-seen-lipstickcom/):
    “Conde Nast, the unlikely Disruptor.”

-   [Bivings
    Report](http://www.bivingsreport.com/2006/cond-nast-buys-reddit/):
    “just sort of scratched at the surface of what might be possible if
    traditional publishers embrace social technologies.”

-   [Digg](http://www.digg.com/tech_news/Breaking_News_Reddit_has_been_acquired):
    “Reddit is where you go when you need someone to explain to you why
    North Korea is heaven on earth and America is the devil”

-   [Wired
    News](http://www.wired.com/news/technology/internet/0,72038-0.html?tw=wn_index_5):
    Users can also append negative votes to stories that are of poor
    quality or that fail to capture their interest.”

-   [Mark Pilgrim](http://diveintomark.org/archives/2006/10/31/ugc): “a
    new form of online scam in which you make all the content, and we
    keep all the money.”

-   [Media Wire
    Daily](http://www.mediawiredaily.com/2006/10/creddit-condenast-reportedly-snapping.html):
    “a clear sign that Charles Townsend is making sure that Conde’s
    digital dick is solid enough to swing with the big boys.”

-   [Matthew
    Ingram](http://www.mathewingram.com/work/2006/10/31/reddit-gets-to-digg-ify-conde-nast/):
    “No word so far on whether the rumoured price of \$65-million has
    any relationship to reality”

-   [Gawker](http://www.gawker.com/news/reddit/conde-nast-buys-reddit-211371.php):
    “merging with the ickle kiddies … the Nasties decided they needed
    more of that Reddit magic.”

-   [GigaOm](http://gigaom.com/2006/10/31/wired-buys-reddit-extended-version/):
    “Reddit received 16 percent of about 300 votes cast, following Boing
    Boing and Gawker.”

-   [Valleywag](http://www.valleywag.com/tech/reddit/behind-the-deal-volume-iii-wired-buys-reddit-211400.php):
    I went to their Boston pad, we played some video games.”

-   [Webomatica](http://www.webomatica.com/wordpress/2006/10/31/reddit-acquired/):
    “digg gone through a Craigslist filter.”

-   [Slashdot](http://slashdot.org/articles/06/10/31/1910231.shtml):
    “the great big Web 2.0 bubble continues to inflate towards the
    popping point”

-   [The
    Register](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2006/10/31/wired_buys_reddit/):
    “the price is many heaps smaller than the \$150m that Kevin Rose
    reportedly wants for Digg”

-   [Joey
    DeVilla](http://www.globalnerdy.com/blog/_archives/2006/10/31/2463082.html):
    “I see that Aaron’s been keeping track of what they’ve written about
    the acquisition on his blog.”

-   [ReadWriteWeb](http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/wired_acquires_reddit.php):
    “Reddit is another to have been extensively profiled by [us].

-   [Press
    Release](http://biz.yahoo.com/bw/061031/20061031005974.html?.v=1):
    “Reddit achieves our objectives on both counts, and we are confident
    that other companies will find Reddit to be a partner that can bring
    tremendous value to their Web efforts.”

-   [Marketing
    Shift](http://www.marketingshift.com/2006/10/wired-bookmarks-reddit.cfm):
    “The obvious question to ask is if Conde Nast will allow Reddit’s
    rankings to remain neutral and not benefit the company’s
    properties.”

-   [CNET](http://news.com.com/2061-10802_3-6131232.html) /
    [MEDIAWEEK](http://www.mediaweek.com/mw/news/interactive/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003319448)




The Aftermath
=============

November 1, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theaftermath)

* * * * *

On Halloween, everything seems a little weird. You see a spider web and
it’s not clear whether it’s real or a prop. You see a nun on the train
and think it might just be a costume. You see girls loitering on the
street only to find they’re just waiting for the *Rocky Horror Picture
Show*. So perhaps that’s why, when I logged into my bank account this
morning and saw more digits in my balance than I’ve ever seen before, I
didn’t feel anything in particular.

“Yeah, it’s there,” I said, to no one in particular. We called everyone
to make sure everything went through okay. Did I get it? Did you get it?
Did we get that? Everything checked out. “Looks like we’re all done
here,” went the email from the lawyers. After months of negotiations for
this day, it had finally come. I almost felt sad seeing the lawyers say
goodbye. Almost.

I sat reloading TechCrunch, then wrote a script to do it for me. Finally
the notice appeared, elaborating as time went on. Then I posted it to my
blog and others to theirs. It started seeming real. Finally, I dashed
downstairs to an ATM machine and asked it to print a slip with my
balance. “Would you like anything else?” it asked. “No,” I said, and
grabbed the slip. The numbers were big; the money was there. I started
grinning and dashed back to the apartment.

But that excitement soon faded. Post after post, congratulation after
congratulation, insult after insult. Friends emailed and called to share
goodwishes. Reporters called to talk to Alexis and Steve. (“No, that’s
A-L-E-X-I-S. Yes. Yes. Well, uh, it’s a news site.”) Users emailed to
send congratulations. “How do you feel?” everyone asked. I didn’t know.
How was I supposed to feel?

TechCrunch called to do a podcast, asked us to tell the listeners the
story of how we got to this day. And it wasn’t that anything said was
particularly wrong, strictly speaking, but I walked away thinking we’d
given the wrong impression. Companies getting bought makes you think of
lawyers in suits at conference tables signing papers. And while there
were lawyers and suits and conference tables and papers to sign (oh,
plenty of papers to sign), it wasn’t really like that. It was more just
a couple guys in a apartment typing on computers and talking on the
phone.

I remember how when reddit started, the whole thing seemed so childish.
The cartoony alien, the barebones design, the fresh-faced programmers,
the rented house. And none of that has really changed. It’s just that
with success behind it, it’s harder to dismiss. A scribbled drawing a
kid hands to you is “cute”, the same thing on the wall of a museum is
“art”. You assume there must be something there, even if you can’t see
it.

It’s hard to notice this when you’re in the middle of it. During the
days, I mostly saw my co-workers, who lived and breathed the site. At
night, I hung out with my friends, who all knew what I did. On weekends,
we’d go to parties for local startups, who all wanted to emulate
reddit’s success. Everyone we talked to treated us like it was serious.

But whenever I stepped outside the bubble, things were very different.
At non-tech parties, I’d have trouble explaining what it was I did. (“So
you, uh, have a web site?”) Once I went far outside the city to have
lunch with an author I respected. He asked about what I did, wanted me
to explain it in great detail. He asked how many visitors we had. I told
him and he sputtered. “I’ve spent fifteen years building an audience,
and you’re telling me in a year you have a million visitors?” I
assented.

Puzzled, he insisted I show him the site on his own computer, but he
found it was just a simple as I described. (Simpler, even.) “So it’s
just a list of links?” he said. “And you don’t even write them
yourselves?” I nodded. “But there’s nothing to it!” he insisted. “Why is
it so popular?”

Inside the bubble, nobody asks this inconvenient question. We just
mumble things like “democratic news” or “social bookmarking” and
everybody just assumes it all makes sense. But looking at this guy, I
realized I had no actual justification. It was just a list of links. And
we didn’t even write them ourselves.

But that’s not something you can say on TechCrunch. You can say a site
is cool, stupid, popular, a flop, innovative, or clichéd. But the one
thing you can’t say, the one thing that everybody skips over, is that
these sites aren’t anything serious. And so when Michael Arrington told
us that these stories of acquisition were his favorite part of the
“entrepreneurial spirit”, I couldn’t help but think that somebody was
missing the point.


The Afterparty
==============

November 2, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theafterparty)

* * * * *

It was Halloween, after all, so we donned costumes and headed to Harvard
Square. (“What are you?” people asked me. I looked them straight in the
eye, scrunched up my face to look a little angry, and said “I’m a
dot-com millionaire” with utter seriousness. That was my costume.)
Alexis carried a sack of candy, Steve a sack of shirts. People in all
sorts of bizarre costumes waited for the train.

We grabbed dinner at Border Cafe. Alexis handed out candy and shirts to
the waiters while flirting, and offered to bribe them into voting for
him in the Halloween costume contest.

I ordered a meal, but couldn’t make myself eat it. The food just sort of
seemed to stick in my mouth, each swallow painful.

“So what are you going to buy first?” someone asked each of us. When it
came to me, I stared blankly. I couldn’t think of anything I wanted.

“Who’s going to pay for the check?” Steve asked. “Oh, wait. I just
realized, for the first time, that it’s relevant.”

Afterwards, we walked down Church Street back to Harvard Square. There
were a bunch of young girls loitering. Alexis struck up a conversation.
“Want some candy?” “Yeah!” they all cried. He opened up the pillowcase.
“Want some shirts?” “Uh, sure,” they laughed, and started fussing over
colors and sizes. It was the strangest transformation, two mild-mannered
guys suddenly become showmen, a horde of girls at their feet. “It’s
times like these I wish I was a *Vanity Fair* reporter,” I tell Chris.

“What’s reddit?” the girls asked as they tried shirts on. “Oh, it used
to be a website.”

“So why are you girls all just standing here?” “We’re waiting for the
*Rocky Horror Picture Show*! You should come.” “Oh. Well, we were going
to go get crunked.” “Well, you can get crunked and then come see it!”

We demurred and continued on, finding a flock of well-suited men,
visiting from other countries, who fell for the same trick. “I’ll have
to give this to my daughter.”

As we walked to a bar, we passed three young girls in bunny costumes who
Alexis tried to pick up. The oldest-looking one wanted to hang out with
us, thought it would be fun, started giggling suggestively, a glimmer
into a pasttime I didn’t understand (my feeling is “men suck”, on both
sides of the equation). But despite her best efforts, her two
younger-looking friends shied away and wanted to just go to *Rocky
Horror*. There was a struggle, and I saw the girls walking towards the
bar and away from it several times after that.

By the time we finally reached the bar, my head was pounding and my
stomach was nauseous, and I didn’t want to go in, I didn’t want to be
here, I didn’t want to know these people. I went home instead and
watched a show about a serial killer and found myself identifying with
the lead.

When I woke up the next morning, my head was fuzzy. And while I saw the
costumes strewn about the floor, the girls brought home who slept in our
living room, the odd emails asking me what I’d do next, I still felt
funny. For a shining moment in the morning, it felt as if this whole
acquisition thing might have simply been a dream.


Everybody Tells Me So
=====================

November 3, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/everybodysays)

* * * * *

I remember when I was in fourth grade, while we were eating our snack
(graham crackers and milk) in the kitchen, my classmates began
discussing the effects of wealth. “Money doesn’t make you happy,” I
insisted. I tried to argue the point, but no one else believed me. (The
same class was later adamant that Clinton should be impeached, although
they did spontaneously throw an anti-fur-coat demonstration.) “Of course
money makes you happy,” they insisted. “Just wait, when you’re rich,
you’ll change your mind.”

I haven’t.

* * * * *

On TV, whenever a kid is given a to-him-large sum of money, the fatherly
adult handing it out says “Don’t spend it all in one place.” Don’t want
the kid blowing it on a single movie and then feeling bad that he spent
it all. Someone emailed me the same thing the other day, and I had to
laugh. I don’t really know how to spend the money period. How could I
possibly spend it all in one place? [Donate it to the
UN?](http://edition.cnn.com/US/9709/18/turner.gift/)

* * * * *

A friend told me to be sure not to let the money change me. “How could
it possibly do that?” I asked. “Well, first you’d buy a fancy new car.”
“I don’t know how to drive.” “Then you’d buy a big house in the
suburbs.” “I like living in small apartments.” “And you’d start wearing
expensive clothes.” “I’ve worn a t-shirt and jeans practically every day
of my life.” “And you’d start hanging out with different people.” “I’m
so shy I don’t even hang out with the people I know now!”

* * * * *

For months, every time we thought we’d really gotten somewhere on the
Condé Nast deal, we’d get a call from Paul Graham. “Don’t get your hopes
up,” he’d say. “Deals fall through.” Whenever we passed him on the
street, “Deals fall through.” In emails, “Deals fall through.” It got to
the point that Alexis put up a photo of Paul Graham and captioned it
“Deals fall through.”

I got an email from Paul Graham the other day. “Ok,” he wrote. “Now you
can get your hopes up.”


Pay it Forward
==============

November 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/payforward)

* * * * *

A year or two ago, I suffered from a devastating server crash. The
little “heads” that read data off the hard drive crashed into the driv
itself, and as we rebooted the computer, trying to get it working again,
they scratched the hard drive so badly that when we sent it to try to
get it repaired we learned they had scraped the drive straight through.

My site was dead, my backups weren’t working, an entire year of my work
had been lost and I was devastated. A bunch of generous souls chipped in
an amazing \$4000 to my server fund to try to bring things back.

Now that I’m back on my feet, I’d like tor eturn the favor by donating
\$4000 to websites in trouble. (Indeed, I’ve been planning this for a
while and have already donated some to sites when I heard they were
having fundraising drives.) So here’s this week’s Sunday Bonus Post:
suggest a site that deserves a donation. Here are the rules:

1.  The site must publish content or provide a service on the Internet.

2.  The site must have a donate button or some other explicit request
    for donations.

3.  You must genuinely like the site.

If you want to nominate a site that meets these criteria, post it here
in a comment. I’ll try to make most of the donations by next week.

* * * * *

**Thanksgiving update:** PayPal locked out my account for “security
reasons” so it’s taken me a while to get to this, but Thanksgiving Day
seems like as appropriate a time as any.

Recipients:

-   [Red State Son](http://redstateson.blogspot.com/)
-   [Amygdala](http://amygdalagf.blogspot.com/)
-   [The Show with Ze Frank](http://www.zefrank.com/theshow/)
-   [The NewStandard](http://newstandard.net/)
-   [Fafblog](http://fafblog.blogspot.com/)
-   [FAIR](http://www.fair.org/)
-   [xkcd](http://www.xkcd.com/)
-   [Orcinus](http://dneiwert.blogspot.com/)
-   [One Good Move](http://onegoodmove.org/1gm/)
-   [Counterpunch](http://www.counterpunch.org/)
-   [Cosma Shalizi](http://www.cscs.umich.edu/~crshalizi/weblog/)
-   [Rockridge Institute](http://www.rockridgeinstitute.org/)
-   [Brad DeLong](http://delong.typepad.com/)
-   [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/)
-   [archive.org](http://www.archive.org/)
-   [MediaLens](http://www.medialens.org/)
-   [California Community Colo Project](http://communitycolo.net/)
-   [Citizen Journalism Nepal](http://cjnepal.org/)
-   [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy](http://plato.stanford.edu/)
-   [Antiwar](http://www.antiwar.com/)
-   [Modest Needs](https://www.modestneeds.org/)
-   [Mininova](http://www.mininova.org/)
-   [OpenStreetMap](http://www.openstreetmap.org/)
-   [Steal This Film](http://www.stealthisfilm.com/)
-   [The Universe of Discourse](http://blog.plover.com/)

I’m still looking for more recipients, so feel free to suggest some.


Mr. Millionaire
===============

November 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mrmillionaire)

* * * * *

*While I’m moving I’ll be running old tortured-psyche fiction pieces.
This one was written in August of 2005, shortly after the first Summer
Founders Program ended.*

I kiss my girlfriend goodbye before walking down the front steps into
the waiting cab. We whir towards the airport. I’ve done this so many
times that the whole act becomes some sort of choreographed dance: step
and lift and pull the suitcase, slam the car door and run towards the
airport. Wave my card at security and take the express lane.

Onboard the plane, I grab my business class seat and push the seat all
the way back, just to remember how it feels. I try to get some sleep but
all too soon we’re there. I grab my bag and head to pick up my rental
car. I toss my luggage in and pretty soon I’m speeding down the
beautiful California road.

‘Ah, Mr. Delboy,’ says the receptionist. ‘We’ve been expecting you.’ She
leads me to a conference room. I take a seat at the tip of the long
table, which stretches all the way down the room, before stopping at a
mahogany bookcase whose shelves remain empty. A fluorescent light gives
everything that yellow glow. Three older men sit on my left, three older
men sit on my right. ‘Let’s get down to business, Mr. Delboy,’ says the
first man on my left. ‘Please, call me Jules,’ I say. ‘We’ve talked it
over and we’re willing to offer three million.’

I lean back in my chair and laugh. ‘Three million?’ I say, turning
serious. ‘Please, I could find three million in my fucking couch. Don’t
waste my time with this stuff.’ I begin to get up. ‘No, wait,’ cries the
first man on the right. ‘Will you take five?’ I sit back down again.
‘Ten,’ I say. ‘Five and a half,’ he says. ‘Ten,’ I say. ‘We’ll have to
discuss it.’

* * * * *

Back in Massachusetts, I head over to visit my friend Lou. Also a
programmer, he was laid off six months ago by a local enterprise
consulting company. Judging by the mounting pile of beer bottles, he’s
had a rough time of it since. He plops down in the couch,
absent-mindedly flicking on and off the TV. FOX News pops on. ‘God, I
hate these twits,’ he says. ‘And the spineless Dems are no better,’ he
adds. ‘I recently got this fancy-schmancy direct mail survey from them
asking what I thought the most important political issue was. There were
all the usual options: Iraq war, social security, health care,
outsourcing — but what about the poor, man? What about those people
whose lives really suck? They keep trying to railroad politics into this
safe little issue-oriented bullshit. When is real change going to
happen?’

‘So, uh, my company is going well,’ I say, trying to change the subject.
‘Yeah?’ he says disinterestedly. ‘Yeah, we got offered five but I’m
trying to push them to ten.’ ‘Thousand?’ he says. ‘Million,’ I say.
‘Fuck, man,’ he says, ‘a million dollars? You have any idea how many
mouths you can feed with that?’ ‘Hey man, don’t try and pull that hippy
bullshit on me, okay? I’m as liberal as anybody. I donate money to
MoveOn.org, I read *Nickel and Dimed*, I’m totally with you on that
stuff.’

‘Shit, Jules, you don’t even know what that stuff is. Do you even live
in the same world as these people? Five million dollars? Can you even
think of what that kind of money means? I mean, sure, to you it means
another jet so you can go galavanting around the world but do you ever
think about the people that you’re flying over?’ ‘Shut up man, I’ve got
serious stuff to worry about, I don’t need to hear your whining.’ I look
over towards the overflowing mountain of beer bottles. ‘Get some help,’
I say and walk out.

* * * * *

I’m walking through Harvard Square when my cell phone rings. ‘Jules
here,’ I say. ‘Alright man, we’ve discussed it and we’re willing to give
you 9 and a half.’ ‘With what vesting?’ I say. ‘5 in cash, 4 and a half
at three years quarterly.’ ‘Three years?’ I say. ‘How about two?’
‘Deal,’ they say. ‘Deal,’ I say. ‘We’ll fax over the papers tomorrow.’ I
snap the phone shut and keep on walking. It’s a beautiful day in
Cambridge. The sun streams down from overhead, casting a special glow on
the minstrels who inhabit the Square and making the colors pop on the
tight-fitting tanktops the coeds wear. Jugglers are tossing rings on my
right. ‘Change please?’ calls a hunched over black man on my left, with
his battered Starbucks cup extended. I keep on walking but he leaves his
perch and starts following me.

‘Hey man, can you spare some change? Anything? Please, I need to eat,’
he says. I keep walking, but I can’t shake him. He gets in front of me,
starts pushing up in my face. ‘Hey man, I see what you’re wearing. Look
here — I got myself a total of three bucks, fifty-seven cents. What do
you have?’ ‘Huh?’ I say. ‘How much money do you have?’ I stop walking
for a second. The man looks up in my face. ‘I said I got three bucks and
how much do you have?’ he repeats. ‘Five,’ I stammer, and then it hits
me. I crumple to the ground and start sobbing.

‘I can’t take it,’ I sob. ‘I’m not cut out for this world. I don’t want
to be in this world. I don’t want to be this person. I don’t want to be
*me*.’ I curl into a ball and start sobbing.

The man with the Starbucks cup backs away and heads back to his perch.
And the rest of the sidewalk traffic just keeps on moving, ignoring the
sobbing millionaire, lying in the middle of the street.


The Early Days of A Better Website
==================================

November 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/earlydays)

* * * * *

*A reporter asked me to describe what the early days of our startup were
like. Here’s my response.*

In the early days of Reddit, there were four of us crammed into a dingy
little three-bedroom apartment (I slept in a kitchen cabinet). Every
morning we’d wake up and stumble into the small space that I think was
supposed to be a living room, where we’d placed desks along all four
walls (Steve’s wall had a small window, with a beautiful view of the
wall of the next building over, just a couple feet away). The sky would
be gray, the floor would be filthy, and we’d be three feet floors away
from the rest of the world. Looking back, it’s hard to see how we got
any work done. Actually, looking back, I’m not sure we did.

Aside from the filth, my memories of those days mostly consist of an
unending series of petty annoyances and frustrations. It’s hard spending
your working days in such close quarters with other people. It’s even
harder when you spend your nights there too. And it’s almost impossible
when you’re all high-strung socially-awkward geeks. Tensions frequently
flared.

Not that there wasn’t a lot to get flared about. There were always bugs
or complaints or new features you just couldn’t get to work. And when
you finally got the site working fine, a new storm of traffic would
overwhelm things and you’d be back to picking up the pieces, making it
run faster and more reliably.

There were lots of problems, but somehow we got over them. Take a nap,
walk the fifteen minutes into town to get some food, go across the
street to the abandoned playground, or, when things got really bad, just
look at that ever-growing traffic graph. We must be doing something
right, we figured, or at least not doing much that’s particularly wrong.

While behind the scenes work was a disaster, in public things were going
great. Every time we went out, more people seemed to know what Reddit
was. We started selling Reddit t-shirts and people wearing them and
recognizing started to pop up over town. One fan, on a short trip to
Boston, even made a pilgrimage to our apartment and stole the Reddit
sticker off our door. (We only found out where the missing sticker had
gone when he bragged about it on his blog.) Reddit heads started
appearing on more and more weblogs and sites I read started talking
about Reddit as if they assumed everyone already knew what it was.

At parties, the awkwardness of trying to tell people what we did for a
living (“We, uh, build a website. You know, it’s kind of a news-type
website.”) gave way to recognition (“Oh yeah, I’ve heard of that
site.”), and then to profuse thanks for a great time-waster. Towards the
end, actual introductions became unnecessary — people started
recognizing us and coming up to say hi.

When I went home to visit my family, my dad insisted on setting up a
meeting for me with a magazine publisher he knew. I was sure the visit
would be a disaster — why would a magazine publisher take a punk kid
like me seriously? — but once she heard our monthly visitor numbers, she
was eager to start a partnership. The same scene repeated itself over
and over.

Even when people had no idea what we did, the traffic gave us
confidence. Once we won a free meal at a restaurant (actually, we won at
least three different times) in exchange for suffering through a short
lecture about financial planning opportunities. As the man talked about
being sure to put money away for a safe day, we looked at each other
knowingly. Either we’d sell big or blow up entirely. Staying safe just
wasn’t in our vocabulary.


Robert Walker, Road Warrior
===========================

November 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/robertwalker)

* * * * *

Robert Walker was the consummate road warrior. A decade out of college,
but still single, his job as a salesman required him to spend his days
traveling the country, making his pitch before assembled audiences of
respected businessmen. Robert had never been one to get too attached to
any place or person, he enjoyed the life on the road, remaking himself
in every new location.

Since he had no one to come home to, he threw himself into his work,
volunteering to take more and more days on the road, until the road
itself became his home. Every place he went looked the same after all:
the same white airports, the same chain stores, the same business types
in the same suits. He felt he was getting to know “the neighborhood” and
developed a routine: Wake up at the Westin in the morning, grab a coffee
at Starbucks, head to the office to make a pitch, grab lunch at a
Cheesecake Factory or a Chili’s, do another pitch at an office, then
catch a plane to the next Westin.

Chain culture became his culture. Aside from the commute by airplane, it
could easily pass for just another job. He eventually let the lease on
his apartment lapse, his suitcase becoming his only possessions. Soon he
got rid of that too, adding the task of picking up a new pair of clothes
as Banana Republic to his nighttime rituals. He felt freer, knowing that
no matter where he went, the world would provide him with all his
favorite things. All he had to do was show his credit card.

He realized the credit card was the only part of the wallet he was using
— it got him his e-tickets at the airport, paid for his clothing and his
meals, reserved the room at his hotels — so he chucked the rest of the
wallet and carried only that. He decided to chuck his cell phone too —
he had the head office call him every morning to tell him where he was
to pitch to next.

Now he truly felt alive. A man with a card — that was all he was — yet
the world bowed before him, ministering to his every want. The people he
interacted with started to seem different to him. No longer were they
simply service workers, doing their job to get their pay. Now they
seemed like *servants*, bowing before him in obeisance to his power.
“Have a nice flight, Mr. Parker”, “Enjoy your meal!”, “Thank you, sir” —
it all now sounded like genuine emotion to him. It sounded like love.

Yes, that was it, he decided. The world had finally come to love him.
The parents who never supported him, the girls who’d quickly abandoned
him, the friends who were never there for him — well, he now had the
last laugh. The world now catered to his every whim, fitting his desires
like a well-tailored glove. And all he had to do to get it? He simply
had to train himself to want what it provided.


The Millionaire’s Ball
======================

November 9, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/millionairesball)

* * * * *

She stood out, you had to admit that. In a crowd of people in suits and
eveningwear with nicely-combed hair and demure smiles, she stood out as
if a spotlight was shone upon her. Which, come to think of it, might
well have been the case. Her hair was purple and spikey, her clothes
ragged and flopping in all directions, one layer upon the next, each
going inside and outside the other in a mockery of the very concept of
layers.

She must have made her money in the dot-coms, he figured. That was the
way the odd ones broke into the club nowadays. In the old days the new
money was made through theft and abuse of office. Now any random
computer programmer — or even the people who hung around them — could
find themselves saddled with a pile of cash. What was that new site he’d
read about in the paper? Something about teens talking to their
computers selling for a billion dollars?

Not that he minded, really. The place needed some new blood.

He strode over, straightening the lines of his suit as he did so — a
habit, he quickly realized; in this case the gesture seemed a bit
superfluous. She was standing by the wall, fiddling with her drink,
looking cautiously out at the surroundings. “Hello?” she said
tentatively, unsure if the tall handsome man was really speaking to her.
“Hello,” he said in a deep gentlemanly voice and bowed. There was an
awkward moment or two as he stood kneeling at her feet. She wasn’t sure
what she was supposed to do here. Then she kneeled down as well and
looked at him conspiratorially. “Maybe we should get out of this place,”
she whispered, grinning.

They both stood back up and glided to the door. He helped her into the
car and had the driver take them back to his place, one of those
buildings for the wealthy in the center of Manhattan. “Hello Jeeves,” he
said to the butler at the door, before they begun dashing up the stairs.
“Is his name really Jeeves?” she asked him. “Oh yes,” he assured her.
“We made him change it.”

They quickly reached his room, a stark and modern affair that
nonetheless managed to signal extreme wealth. They fell into designer
chairs and he removed his coat. “Would you like a cigarette?” he asked.
“Oh yes,” she replied. He removed a green piece of paper from a box on
the shelf and rolled it with tobacco. He handed one to her and offered
her a light before taking one himself. It smelled funny and as she
removed it from her mouth she saw why — it was a crisp one hundred
dollar bill.

He saw her eyes go wide as she looked at it and laughed. “You don’t burn
money where you come from?” he asked. “I have to admit,” she said, “the
idea had never occurred to me.” “Oh, it’s quite enjoyable,” he said,
removing the entire stack of hundred dollar bills and lighting it on
fire.

She stared at the flame, unsure of what to do. On the one hand, she was
aghast at the wastefulness of the thing. But at the same time it was
somehow incredibly alluring. Lighting money on fire — it was like
pornography for the rich. Her eyes went wide and he leaned in close for
a kiss, the flames still dancing behind his head.

“What else do you do?” she asked, entranced. “Well, we could flush some
down the toilet, I suppose,” he said, “but I’ve got something even
better.” “Jeeves, ready the car,” he said into the intercom on the wall,
before dashing down the stairs again.

The car dropped them off along the water. She wasn’t quite sure where;
her sense of the city wasn’t particularly good. They strode, arm-in-arm,
breathing in the elegance of the moment. “It’s wonderful,” she said,
“but I don’t se—”. “Just wait,” he assured her. They saw a cop up ahead,
strolling towards them, and in plain view he walked over to a building
and ripped a small statue straight off and presented it to her as a
gift.

The officer’s face hardened. “Sir!” he insisted. “Oh, officer!” he said,
as if he hadn’t noticed him before. “How good to see you.” “You can’t be
stealing things right off of buildings,” the officer said gruffly. “Oh,
you know I can,” he replied. “I can do much more than that.” The officer
looked increasingly angry. “I’ll give you ten thousand dollars,” he
said, pulling out his checkbook, “if you take off all your clothes.”

The officer’s eyes darted back and forth, unsure of what to do. But when
he saw the check, he begun complying. He really could use the money. She
laughed and he whispered in her ear. She smiled and begun looking
through her bag. “Smile!” she cried when he was done and snapped a
picture. He saw the officer’s eyes go wide and seized the moment to grab
his clothes and toss them into the water. They both begun laughing. The
officer tried to avoid crying. “What about my check?” the officer
pleaded. He begun to hand it to him, before snatching it back and
tearing it in two. He tossed it into the air and then they pivoted and
walked away laughing.

They headed back into the car to one last stop for the night, pulling up
outside some nightclub she’d never heard of. Attractive young men and
women about their age were dancing to some heavy electronic-sounding
beat. He got up on a table. “Excuse me,” he said, “excuse me! I have
here a check for one hundred thousand dollars. Come over here for a
chance to win it.” They all stopped dancing and came over. Now he had
them in his paw. He made them jump for the check, then he made them get
down on their knees and bark for it like dogs. And they complied — a
hundred twenty-somethings in trendy clothing, all down on their knees
barking. She’d never seen anything so funny in her life.

He did a few more rounds of this before finally tossing the check into
the middle of the pile. Everyone lunged for it as he climbed down from
the table and made his getaway. “Was it a real check?” she asked. “Oh
yes,” he said, “but by the time anyone gets it it’ll be torn to shreds.”

Back at the apartment he lifted her off he feet and tossed her onto the
bed. He climbed on top and begun untwisting her layers of clothing, both
going at each other ferociously.

She woke up the next morning, lying next to him in bed. He was smiling,
gazing at her face. She was racked with guilt. “Look,” she said.
“There’s something I have to tell you. I’m not who you think I am.” He
gazed into her eyes, slightly puzzled, and she was about to explain when
they heard some scratching at the door.

He jumped up, just in time to be standing nude as the police burst in
with bulletproof vests and guns. “Mr. Januski,” one shouted, “you’re
under arrest for the creation of counterfeit US tender and check fraud.”
They cuffed his hands behind his back and begun dragging him away.
“Wait,” he said, “you’re not even going to let me get my clothes on?”
“No,” said an officer, who he soon recognized to be the one from last
night. “Now let’s go.” They dragged him out the door as she sat there in
shock.

Finally, she got up and put her clothes back on and then set about going
carefully through the room, tossing everything of value into her purse.
When she’d done a thorough job, she locked the door behind her dashed
down the stairs. “Goodbye, Jeeves,” she said, as she exited the
building.


Life at the Office
==================

November 10, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/officelife)

* * * * *

It started when he stopped going home. The rent in San Francisco was so
expensive and the commutes so painful that it just seemed easier not to
leave. Nobody really noticed at first—the cleaning crew came in around 7
and just assumed he was staying late, while the other employees just
assumed he was an early riser. And really, who’s going to complain about
an employee who puts in too much time at the office? Especially when he
wasn’t using it to get additional work done.

Then he started wondering if he could eliminate the trip for food too.
He found a website that sold nutritionally-balanced diet bars and
ordered a whole tub, which he placed under his desk. All day he’d be
munching on one bar or another, no longer feeling hungry around lunch or
dinner. So he just sat at his desk munching instead. Strangely, this
didn’t seem to make him any more productive.

Between the lack of exercise and nonstop eating, he began growing fat.
Nobody really said anything to him about it. He was rail-thin when he
started so many co-workers were secretly happy to see him put on a few
pounds. But it quickly got out of hand, with rolls of fat oozing between
the cracks in his Aeron chair. Still, nobody wants to insult a fat man,
so he just continued to grow. He never really needed to leave his chair
anymore, so he didn’t mind it much.

Soon he began—I’m not quite sure how to describe it, I guess he was sort
of *fusing* with the chair. The rolls of fat would sneak through a crack
and then continue growing, like vines crawling through a gate. It
quickly got to the point where he couldn’t even get out of the chair if
he wanted too, the fat had locked him in. He could still roll around the
office on it but that movement quickly became tiring and as he grew
fatter the wheels snapped off.

Nobody really seemed to mind, though. He had become an office
fixture—people came to him now. He’d chat with them about their day or
keep an eye on things for them. Since he was always there he knew
everything that went on in the office and people could always rely on
him for gossip or signing for their packages.

Soon it seemed like he was part of the office itself, like some sort of
roboreceptionist you read about in Negroponte novels. Desks began subtly
organizing themselves around him and employees began treating him as
just another office fixture. There’s the bathroom and there’s the
kitchen and there’s, well, you know…

And then, one day, they left. Some corporate restructuring or something;
they were all being moved to a different building. People packed their
stuff in boxes, cleaners cleaned one more time, and then suddenly they
were all gone. He was all that was left, keeper of an office without any
officers.


The Meaning of Borat
====================

November 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/borat)

* * * * *

*For this week’s Sunday Bonus Post, I’m reprinting a note I sent to some
email lists.*

I went to see the film *Borat* last night. To be honest, I didn’t really
enjoy it as entertainment as much as I thought I would. Nevertheless, I
thought I wanted to correct a common misconception.

A lot of people seem to think the movie is just making fun of
stereotypes. Borat is a sterotypical foreigner, his “victims” are
stereotypical Americans, and the humor comes from laughing at them.
There are perhaps a couple short scenes where this might be true, but
it’s a pretty small part of the film.

In reality, *Borat* is about the existence and enforcement of cultural
norms. In place after place, Borat goes somewhere and does exactly what
you’re not supposed to do. By doing so, he demonstrates exactly what our
cultural assumptions are, makes us laugh uncomfortably at their
violation while we start to question their legitimacy, and then
documents the punishment inflicted for violating them.

There are scenes where he questions feminist dogma, provides a brilliant
critique of nationalist rhetoric, violates norms about racial
integration, takes superstar-worship culture to its logical conclusion,
and, in my favorite scene, deconstructs the fake niceties of the
television interview (something I’ve always dreamed of doing).

This is an incredibly tough kind of humor to do, because watching people
violate cultural norms is so challenging. We’re ingrained from birth
with an injunction to follow the rules of behavior in such situations
and violating them does not come naturally. (A Japanese friend said that
watching the film was actually painful in parts.)

Even though, as I said, I personally didn’t enjoy the film as much as I
hoped, I still think that it’s an important project. Challenging
cultural assumptions is incredibly tough. If you just criticize them
outright, people think you’re weird and dismiss you. And if you violate
them yourselves, you suffer the social punishments. But it’s a very
worthwhile cause; I’m glad to see someone receive so much success for
trying.


Meeting Peter Singer
====================

November 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/petersinger)

* * * * *

I remember watching an episode of *Penn & Teller* about animal rights.
As usual, the show mostly consisted of a long series of clips relating
to animal rights, followed by comments from Penn making fun of the idea.
This show, I recall, was particularly weak. They didn’t even pretend to
make an argument; it was entirely mockery.

Watching this, I couldn’t help but realize there was a powerful logical
argument at the core of the animal rights groups: animals should be
treated much the same way humans are — their lives should be respected,
their pain minimized, etc. Make this one simple change to your system of
morality and everything else falls into place. PETA actually seems kind
of measured when they refer to “the Holocaust on your plate”.

Peter Singer is the moral philosopher who has probably done the most to
promote this idea. With a wide-ranging career spanning from Marx to
meat, his book *Animal Liberation*, which quietly and thoughtfully makes
this case, is widely-regarded as launching the animal liberation
movement.

I was recently dragged to the Boston Vegetarian Festival to see Singer
speak about his new book, *The Way We Eat*, and was deeply impressed by
his thoughtfulness and clarity of mind. An aging fellow with thoughtful
glasses, he looks like Noam Chomsky, another plainspoken professor. He
is not a passionate activist who has taken on the cause of animals, but
simply what he appears: a moral philosopher who started thinking about
the issue one day and drew the logical conclusions.

After his talk, a woman in the audience asked a question about the
rumors that he would sometimes eat non-vegan food. The audience was
scandalized. “Let me address that,” Singer said. “I don’t believe in
veganism as a religion. I simply believe that refraining from eating
animal products is the most effective way of putting pressure on
producers to stop abusing and killing animals. Sometimes, if a host
misunderstands my request and makes non-vegan food, instead of throwing
it away, I will eat it. I don’t think this is a problem, because I don’t
think this does any moral harm.”

Another person asked how he could say good things about Whole Foods when
they were still serving numerous animal products. “Whole Foods has the
best standards for animal treatment of any major organization,” he
replied. “That’s simply a fact. And, I think it’s a good thing. Do I
think not using animals at all would be even better? Of course. But I
praise people for the good things they do and condemn them for the bad
ones.”

A final question raised the incrementalism versus revolutionism debate
common to all left-wing social movements. Should one really worry about
animal treatment when the animals were still going to be killed? Pinger
said the answer was undoubtedly yes. “Look, I thought that when *Animal
Liberation* came out everyone would read it and become a vegan. But it’s
been thirty years and vegans are still less than 10% of the population.
If you genuinely care about animal suffering, you have to admit that,
and say, ‘what else can we do to ease animal suffering?’”

After Singer’s talk, I began thinking through the consequences of his
morality. A question occurred to me: “Should we also stop animals from
eating each other?” I was sure others had made such arguments as
*reductio ad absurdums* of vegetarianism, but I thought I might be the
first to be genuinely interested in it from a moral perspective.

“Of course not,” said my friend. “It’s not our fault if the animals kill
each other.” “You mean,” I said, “that you think it’s perfectly moral to
let that guy” — I pointed at a random guy nearby — “go around killing
people?” “Well, OK,” he said. “But it’s different with animals, because
they don’t know any better.” “You mean it would be OK to let him go
around killing people if he was mentally ill and didn’t realize he was
doing it?” “You should go ask Singer,” he said.

So I did — he was signing books outside the lecture hall and as the line
ended I asked him my question. His answer was even better than I
imagined: “We would if we knew how to do so without making things worse
and disturbing the ecosystems and so on.” “Thanks!” I said, impressed.
He spied the large white book I was hugging to my chest. “Are you
reading Kolakowski?” he asked. “Yep,” I said smiling. “Had to read that
when I was studying Marx a long time ago. It’s heavy,” he said. “Quite
literally!” I replied, hefting the 1200 page book. He smiled.

“I have to say, though,” I said, feeling guilty, “that I don’t agree
with your *Darwinian Left* stuff.” “That’s OK,” he replied. “You don’t
need to agree with everything I write.” Then he wandered off, looking
for the next thing to see.

I had to get that off my chest, because it was the one thing bugging me
about Singer. Somehow later in life Singer had become a sociobiologist,
one of that vulgar group of psuedoscientists who insist — despite all
evidence — that humans are genetically programmed to do all everything a
right-wing politician could imagine. (Sociobiology having gotten a bad
name, they now call themselves evolutionary psychologists.)

In his book *A Darwinian Left*, however, Singer explains that this is no
reason for the left to despair. If people are actually born stupid,
that’s only *more* justification for left-wing policies. We need to
provide the stupid people with the extra resources to live on equal
terms as the smart people. Steven Pinker cites this book (along with
Singer’s *The Expanding Circle*) several times in his execrable *Blank
Slate* to prove that his noxious views aren’t necessarily right-wing.
(Neither Pinker nor Singer, of course, provide any real evidence to show
this actually is the way humans are.)

That said, as usual Singer’s conclusions do follow from his premises —
if you do make that one small change to the way you think the world
works, then his conclusions about what we should do to remedy it
undoubtedly follow. I just wish he’d check his assumptions.

That aside, it seems unfair to dismiss Singer on the basis of a small
blemish on an incredibly long and varied career — *Wikipedia* lists over
forty books he’s written or co-authored. His thoughtfulness and clarity
in sharing it is an example to us all.


The Existential Terror of San Francisco
=======================================

November 14, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfterror)

* * * * *

After I sold my company I decided to visit New York City one time before
I moved out to San Francisco. The trip was a lot of fun, but at one
point I found myself completely out of cash, my ATM/debit card snapped
in half, my credit card deactivated for suspected fraud, and my phone
out of batteries. Then I got off at the wrong subway stop and found
myself deep in the wrong part of Harlem.

As scary as that was, it wasn’t anywhere near as frightening as the
existential terror I feel every day walking the streets of San
Francisco.

When I walked through the streets of Manhattan, I saw residents going
for a stroll or walking their dog or playing with their kids and I
thought “Ah, I could live here”. But even while I’m living in San
Francisco I still can’t quite believe it can be done. I saw a mother out
walking with her daughter and thought “What are you doing?! Don’t you
know this is no place for a child?”

The whole city feels like some sort of movie set; oversized and fake.
Every time I go out I worry that I might miss my mark or fumble my lines
and on the rare occasions that I do, I am mercilessly excoriated by the
city officials. When New Yorkers bark at you for screwing up, it’s
because they’re impatient. But San Franciscans seem to do it much more
frequently and with much more emotion. You’re not just wasting my time,
their tone of voice says, you’re insulting me with your stupidity.

I’ve been to San Francisco before, of course, but always on very
carefully planned excursions. Go to this place, take this subway, get
off here. I realized after I moved here that this was the first day I’d
really woken up in the city and it was terrifying. I ran down the street
to catch my train to work and (after getting barked at by city employees
for waiting in the wrong place) found the train packed to the edges,
with barely enough space for me to stand.

The city maltreats you even when you’re not doing anything wrong. I
tried to take a bus from the place I was staying to downtown one night
and, after everyone else got off at earlier stops, the bus driver
noticed I was the only one left in the bus and kicked me out before he’d
finished the route. “Yeah, this is the last stop now,” he said. “Get
out.”

Of course the downtown district is a den of filth and vice, shops with
names like “Tenderloin Liquors” and “Adult Show Superstore” with gangs
of leering indigents sitting on every streetcorner. In Harlem, people
mostly kept their eyes down and kept walking. Here everyone calls out to
me, like a dark postapocalyptic scene from *Blade Runner* or *A.I.*.

Of course, San Francisco isn’t all pain. Every time I begin to think
it’s too much to bear and that I have to get out of town now, it does
some little thing to redeem itself. I’m spit on by every drunk and
transit worker, rained on from the entirely cloud-covered sky, splashed
on by the busses refusing to follow their routes, but then I’m
wonderfully treated by the staff of the soaring San Francisco Library
and then I’m cheerful again until the next guy spits in my face.

One night, the friend I’m staying with invited me to go with her to San
Francisco’s Midnight Riders and lent me a bike to do so. The bike was a
road bike, which I didn’t know how to use, and I didn’t have a helmet.
We sped down hills as I peddled furiously and met up with a group of
drunk people (some of whom were also on cocaine) carrying axes (the
theme was “I Married an Axe Murderer”) as we sped around the city,
culminating at the pier, where some of them stripped down and jumped
into the freezing water.

After that terrifying night, San Francisco didn’t really scare me
anymore, but it still felt wrong. Perhaps a movie set is a fairly safe
place to actually be, but when you live on-stage it’s difficult to get
any privacy. Having to live my life on stage in this dark, cartoony,
mask-filled world seems like a more terrifying nightmare than anything
an axe-wielding gang of cocaine-high bikers could do.


Office Space
============

November 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/officespace)

* * * * *

People are always asking me how I manage to get so much done. For a
while I tried to impress them with [my pearls of
wisdom](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity) but soon I just sort
of gave up. I don’t really feel like I do anything special — I worry
about getting stuff done a lot, but mostly I just sort of do it.

It wasn’t until I started working in an office that the question begun
to make sense. Since I moved to San Francisco I literally haven’t gotten
anything done. I haven’t finished a book (I finished three on the plane
out here), I haven’t answered many emails (I used to answer hundreds a
day), I’ve written only a couple blog posts (I used to do one a day),
and I haven’t written a line of code (I used to write whole programs in
the evenings). It’s a pretty incredible state of affairs.

You wake up in the morning, take some crushing public transit system or
dodge oncoming traffic to get to work, grab some food, and then sit down
at your desk. If you’re like most people, you sit at a cube in the
middle of the office, with white noise buzzing around on every side.
We’re lucky enough to get our own shared office, but it’s not much
better since it’s huge windows overlook a freeway and the resulting
white noise is equally deadening.

Wired has tried to make the offices look exciting by painting the walls
bright pink but the gray office monotony sneaks through all the same.
Gray walls, gray desks, gray noise. The first day I showed up here, I
simply couldn’t take it. By lunch time I had literally locked myself in
a bathroom stall and started crying. I can’t imagine staying sane with
someone buzzing in my ear all day, let alone getting any actual work
done.

Nobody else seems to get work done here either. Everybody’s always
coming into our room to hang out and chat or invite us to play the new
video game system that *Wired* is testing. The upside is that while we
haven’t gotten much of our work done, we have managed to do many other
people’s. Various folks from around the office have shown up to have us
help them with their technical problems, which we usually solve fairly
quickly. We joked that we should get transferred to their IT department
instead of Web development.

We’ve been spared most of the brunt of it, but their IT policy is pretty
scary. There’s a company Internet connection, which routes everything
through the IT HQ in Delaware, presumably the better to spy on us on. On
Day 1 they took our laptops and “backed up” the drives to ensure they
had a copy of all our data. (We scurried to get our MP3 collections and
worse off first.)

Then they issued us company-approved laptops: terribly-slow iBook G4s
complete with Conde Nast desktop and screensaver with spy software
pre-installed. When they gave us the machines we didn’t even have
administrator access on them. The clock was set to the Eastern time
zone; I needed an IT department person to change it to show me
California time.

The company laptop is necessary to read our company email which, being
on a Microsoft Exchange server, requires a special Microsoft email
client to read. You also need to be on a company laptop to access the
company network, where you can log into a maze of PeopleSoft web sites
to file expense reports and change your health benefits.

I feel wiped after dealing with this non-work for a couple hours, but I
can’t get any rest from lying on our couch because it too is surrounded
by the white noise.

Finally at 5 the office empties out and I can go home where, to
compensate for the dullness of the days, I brighten up the nights.
Life-threatening bicycle rides, dinners and movies with friends,
museums, running along the beach, navigating the nightmare of public
transit to visit the new hot spot. And if I get home early there are the
roommates eager to chat about their days. By the time I break away it’s
midnight, if not 3am. I had to spend much of the weekend sleeping just
to catch up.

And then it’s back to the grind once again. A carousel that never stops
to let you get off.


Kahle v. Ashcroft write-up
==========================

November 16, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlevashcroft)

* * * * *

*Here’s a writeup I did of the Kahle v. Ashcroft argument in the style
of a Wired News piece. Unlike [my last parody of Wired
News](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/startupschool), this one [actually
got posted on
wired.com](http://blog.wired.com/27bstroke6/2006/11/ringside_at_cop.html),
albeit only on one of their blogs. I hope to write a real post about
this but I’m feeling too crummy to do it today.*

SAN FRANCISCO, California—Acclaimed Stanford professor Lawrence Lessig
and Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle argued Monday that the
changes in the Copyright Act should be subject to the scrutiny of the
First Amendment. In the case *Kahle v. Gonzales*, argued here at the
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, Brewster Kahle is arguing that he should
be permitted to make “orphaned works”—works whose copyright holder can
no longer be located—available for free on his website.

The case began after Lessig’s loss before the Supreme Court in his
previous suit, *Eldred v. Ashcroft*. Lessig argued that Congress’s
perpetual extension of the copyright act violated the Constitution’s
requirement that copyright only be granted for “limited Times”. The
Court disagreed, saying that Congress was allowed to modify copyright
law as long as it didn’t change the law’s “traditional contours”.

Now Lessig is back, arguing that Congress has done just that. For nearly
two hundred years, he notes, copyright has been an “opt-in” system.
Authors who wanted their work to be copyrighted had to mark it with a
copyright symbol, file a registration with the Copyright Office, deposit
a copy with the Library of Congress, and file a renewal if they wanted
to receive the full term. All that changed with the sweeping 1976
Copyright Act, which made a work copyrighted as soon as it was “fixed in
a tangible form”.

Under the old system, according to Lessig, 93% of works went into the
public domain before their term had expired. Now, 0% do.

Lessig argues that such a fundamental change — moving copyright from an
opt-in to an opt-out system — constitutes a change in the law’s
“traditional contours” and thus, under the precedent set in *Eldred*,
means the law must be examined by a Court to see if it violates the
First Amendment.

The Government disagrees, insisting that the only “traditional contours”
the *Eldred* decision refers to are the “fair use” provision of the
copyright law, which allows for the public to make certain uses of
copyrighted works, and the “idea-expression dichotomy”, which means that
ideas cannot be directly copyrighted, only their expression. The 1976
law did not change either of these.

The judges hearing the case asked Lessig to explain how this case
differed from *Eldred*. “In *Eldred* the argument was about whether
Congress could retrospectively extend the copyright law to keep Mickey
Mouse out of the public domain,” he explained. “This case is only about
‘orphaned works’ — works whose copyright holders can’t even be tracked
down to give permission.” “Unlike Disney,” the judge added.

The *Kahle* case is part of a multi-pronged strategy to deal with
orphaned works. Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren (D-CA) has introduced a bill
called the “Public Domain Enhancement Act”. The idea, based on a *New
York Times* op-ed published by Lessig shortly after his loss in
*Eldred*, is that copyright holders will need to send \$1 to the
government after 50 years to renew their copyright. If they don’t send
the dollar, their works will go into the public domain. But even if they
do, their name and address will be on file so others who wish to use the
work will know how to contact them.

The US Copyright Office has also held hearings on the subject of
“orphaned works”, concluding in a hundred-page report sent to the Senate
Judiciary Committee that “The orphan works problem is real.” and
“Legislation is necessary to provide a meaningful solution to the orphan
works problem as we know it today.”

Plaintiff Brewster Kahle founded the Internet Archive after selling his
company Alexa to Amazon.com in the 1990s. The site, as Kahle often says,
provides “infinite bandwidth and infinite disk space for infinite time”
to freely-licensed works. Kahle wants to have his website provide
orphaned works, just as libraries make available out-of-print books, but
under current law would have to track down the copyright holder for
every work.

The same problem plagues projects like Google’s Book Search. Presently,
Google must track down the copyright holder before making a book
publicly available or face hefty fines. But since copyright terms are
now so long, this means most out-of-print books will never be available,
simply because their copyright holders are so difficult to find.

The Court is expected to rule on the case sometime next year.


Ostensible Networks vs. Friendship Networks
===========================================

November 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ostensiblenetworks)

* * * * *

I visited New York last weekend and although I’d physically been there
many times before, this was the first time I felt like I’d really seen
the city. Ostensibly, it’s very easy to go to New York. There are lots
of plane tickets available online and then you can book a hotel right
there. I’ve done this many times before and every time I came away
feeling like I hadn’t really seen New York, but only bits and pieces
made available for tourist consumption. I didn’t feel like I understood
the city.

It wasn’t until this time, when I stayed with generous friends, that I
felt I really saw the city. They showed me cute little places to eat,
explained how to use the impossibly complex transit system, pointed me
to maps and websites to help, recommended good spots to see at good
times, and simply let me be with actual New Yorkers. I saw New York
through the eyes of a New Yorker.

Now there are ostensible systems to help with all of these. There are
guidebooks to recommend restaurants and infodesks and posters to explain
how things work, but they never really can surpass the power of a
friend.

If you look, you see ostensible networks everywhere. Ostensibly, jobs
are posted in the want ads, but you can definitely snag one if you have
a friend. Ostensibly, there are bureaucratic rules that must be
followed, but usually can bypass them with a friend on the inside.
Ostensibly, academic fields are learnable by anyone, but to really
understand them you need a friend to take you through it. Ostensibly,
web sites are supposed to be clear enough that anyone can use them, but
for most of them you need a friend to show you how it’s done.

A lot of people don’t realize the importance of friendship networks.
They think the world largely works the way it’s ostensibly supposed to.
You do good work, you follow the rules, you get noticed, you get the
benefits. And when they fail to succeed or comprehend, it’s probably
because they’re stupid or somebody isn’t following the system. But it’s
neither of those, it’s the system that’s stupid — you don’t succeed
through hard work, you succeed through friendship networks.

This has clear implications for one’s personal behavior: when you want
to do something, don’t follow the rules but look for a friend. (Sure,
you could stay in a New York hotel — but you’d be much better off
sleeping on the floor of a friend.) And build up lots of friends so that
you’ll be able to call on them when you need them. (Find a book you
really like? Send the author a friendly note.)

But it also has systematic implications. Because our friendship networks
are so skewed towards other’s like us, making things dependent of
friendship networks serves as a subtle form of discrimination and
exclusion. A stranger in the middle of Nebraska will have a hard time
learning Geology because they don’t know any geologists. A writer living
deep in Kansas will have a hard time getting their work published
because few of the publishers have ever heard of them.

There are two ways to fight this. One is to be more generous about
finding friends. Get to know random people who email you, talk to people
on the plane or at the theater, take part in activities that go beyond
your typical location and social stratum.

But these techniques can only go so far — despite my best efforts, I’ll
never be able to even consider being friends with the vast majority of
the world’s population. The better option is to help move things from
friendship networks to ostensible networks, to document the cool places
in New York City, to start websites where you can [find people to stay
with](http://www.couchsurfing.com/), to not automatically give jobs and
perks to friends, to build things clear enough that anyone can use them.

Sure, it can be hard to say no to a friend. But wouldn’t you want
someone to extend you the same courtesy?


San Francisco: Silicon Valley’s Ghetto
======================================

November 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfghetto)

* * * * *

Big American cities have a shameful history of setting up smaller ones
into which to punt the workers who make their city run. In *Amazing
Grace*, Jonathan Kozol writes heart-wrenchingly about life in East St.
Louis. And a little closer to home, in the shining Valley city of Palo
Alto, the workers and their families (as usual, mostly people of color)
are shunted into East Palo Alto at the end of the day.

Not only does this keep the workers and their families out of sight and
out of crime, but it has beneficial political effects too. The workers
may elect their own mayor, who is economically powerless to do anything
about their plight, and they may attend their own school system,
maintaining the new racial and economic segregation of American schools.
(Incidentally, Stanford recently purchased East Palo Alto High School so
it can run experiments on the poor children.)

It would be absurd and offensive to compare life in San Francisco to
life in these impoverished neighborhoods, but I can’t help but feel
there are some structural similarities. Whatever else San Francisco is,
it is a reaction to the Valley. Many of the people I’ve met here are
doing their best to escape their stifling Silicon Valley jobs, taking
the bus or train or car every day into work, then running back as soon
as they can.

The result is that San Francisco ends up being something like the
opposite of the Valley. The Valley has its clean if gray office
buildings in neat squares; San Francisco has its rough and random dirty
shops and houses drizzled across hillsides. The Valley is full of
conservative corporate behavior; San Francisco is full of left-wing
activists. The Valley is where people work, so San Francisco is where
they play, throwing frisbees in parks and hanging out in coffee shops or
going to dance parties at night. The Valley is a place of businesslike
behavior; in San Francisco people hug deeply when they meet. (Not
everyone, of course; none of this is everyone, but more than enough to
be noticeable.)

The result, like some Marxist dialectic, is that neither the City nor
the Valley really feel real. Both are reacting against each other,
playing off their faults, waiting for some synthesis to put the pieces
back together. The result is, to be sane you have to be in both.

City people refer to Palo Alto as Shallow Alto, which might even be
literally true. The city is a thin strip of road, surrounded on one side
by houses and on the other by offices, with Stanford behind it and other
cities in front. It is, perhaps, a decent place to work — the finest
upscale fakery you can find along relatively clean streets where even
the homeless are white — but it’s apparently a terribly boring place to
live.

Meanwhile the city is all action. People are “intellectually lazy” here,
complains one resident. You can zip around on bikes and scooters, drop
into parties and nightclubs, gab with friends, eat good food, stroll by
shops, do everything but actually get work done. People here are fleeing
from work, not looking for it.

And so, to live, you ping-pong back and forth. A job you hate in the
Valley, but you have to keep it so that it pays the exorbitant rent in
the City, which you have to live in to escape the deadliness of the
Valley. High highs, low lows, bright nights, dark days.

I suspect the City works as an escape valve in other ways. Instead of
unioninizing your big corporate employer, you simply flee to a False
Profit party, secure in your anti-capitalist sentiment. Instead of
working to build a better life, you go out dancing with your friends,
trying to enjoy the little time you have.

Which, I have to say, is better than most. Most office drones just go
home and watch TV, their work having drained from them the energy for
any more productive activity. I suspect some of the difference lies in
the peculiar economics of the computer industry. The people in it are
unusually smart and talented. And the barriers to entry are so low that
if they wanted to they could start their own thing (and, as the startup
world shows, many do). So perhaps one has to “heighten the distractions”
to keep them busy.

But who knows? I’ve got a party to get to.


Disinfecting the Sunlight Foundation
====================================

November 20, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dissunlight)

* * * * *

For years, [Mike Klein](http://www.mikeklein.com/) was a big-time [D.C.
corporate lawyer](http://www.wilmerhale.com/michael_klein/). He’d made
millions starting a string of companies, including [an air cargo
carrier](http://www.astaraircargo.us/), [a D.C.
restaurant](http://www.leparadou.net/), [a D.C. art
gallery](http://www.zenithgallery.com/), and [a real estate information
database](http://www.costargroup.com/). But then Klein’s son, aghast at
the horrors of his government under Bush II, fled the country. Or, as
Klein put it in [an interview with the Harvard Law School Alumni
Bulletin](http://www.law.harvard.edu/alumni/bulletin/2006/spring/closing.php),
“My two sons led me to realize that a significant part of their
generation thinks democracy isn’t worth engagement or even respect. For
an old 1960s activist like myself, that was the tipping point.”

It’s natural for a father to want to fix things for his sons (and
perhaps for a wealthy D.C. lawyer to feel a bit guilty about it as
well), so Klein, leaning a bit more on his corporate millions than his
sixties activism, started a foundation. Taking its name from Justice
Brandeis’s famed comment that “Sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants”, the [Sunlight
Foundation](http://www.opensecrets.org/pressreleases/2003/SpeakingFreely.asp)
was formed to promote transparency and accountability in American
government.

Most such organizations would do this by running investigations and
publishing reports, but the Sunlight Foundation decided to take a
different tack. Instead, [as Klein put
it](http://www.mikeklein.com/text.html), Sunlight would “be utilizing
21st Century information technology, and Web 2.0 energy”.

The Foundation was formed in January 2006 and, thanks to Klein, was
quickly swimming in cash. Their first major project was
[Congresspedia](http://www.congresspedia.org/), a Wikipedia-like site to
keep track of information on members of Congress. Unlike most Web 2.0
sites, they bought large ads on the major political weblogs to promote
the new site. (Despite this blanket promotion — and the hiring of a
full-time editor — the site seems to have about the same level of
activity as the [They Might Be Giants wiki](http://www.tmbw.net/).)

Some of their other projects are about what you’d expect: [a federal
funding-Google Maps mashup](http://sunlightlabs.com/earmarks/), [a
Congressional tag
cloud](http://sunlightlabs.com/widgets/doc/widget_sunlightfoundationtagcloud.php),
[a video contest](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/node/1219) mocking
of members of Congress who don’t release their schedules. (They’ve also
donated money to already-existing related projects, many of which are
doing valuable work.)

Their most recent project was an invite-only conference in San Francisco
to bring together the leaders in this nascent field. (Disclosure: I
attended and just about everyone there from the Sunlight Foundation
invited me to take their money.) Funder Klein hailed the Foundation as
the most important and fastest-growing project he’d ever started, while
executive director Ellen Miller noted that this year they’d launched
several projects, all of which had been successes. (Afterwards I asked
her what her metric for success was. “We’re throwing stuff up on the
wall and seeing what sticks,” she explained. And success, I confirmed,
means “it hasn’t completely fallen apart yet”.)

* * * * *

As a Web 2.0 developer, it’s hard for me to see how even the best Web
2.0 site can have much of a positive impact on government. Genuinely
promoting transparency requires the hard work of doing investigative
research, publishing reports, and promoting them to the media. Bubble
2.0 hype aside, the fanciest pop-up windows and and Google Maps mashups
won’t change that.

The attendees seemed to begin to recognize this. In a breakout session
on reaching users, a guru from Web 2.0 consultancy [Adaptive
Path](http://adaptivepath.com/) tried to walk us through their user
experience process. “Remember,” she told us, “these sites aren’t about
what *you* want to do; they’re about improving the lives of your users
by connecting with their *real needs*.” We gave our example user a name
(Jane) and backstory (too busy driving her kids to care about politics,
but upset at the high gas prices she has to pay). And that’s where we
got stuck. Is Jane really going to muddle through graphs generated from
FEC reporting data?

We decided our saviors would be the “Paul Reveres” — the people who care
enough about politics to slog through the data and then mass email their
friends when they find something good (we concluded that going after
newspaper reporters was too Web 1.0). They would save us from having to
write reports or take positions; all we had to do was make the data
available and let them do the rest.

I’m sure there are a handful of people who actually do this, but it
seems like we’re spending an awful lot to build a site just for them.
And even then, what impact will they have? Even if our Paul Revere finds
the smokingest of smoking guns and posts it on their extremely popular
blog, without a larger political platform it will only fuel the cynicism
that Klein claims he’s trying to combat. (“There they go again,” the
reader thinks, and hits the back button.)

Even if Klein is for some reason averse to taking an actual political
stand (maybe he doesn’t vote the same way as his sons?), there’s still
much to be done. Several people in the session were from the group that
runs [the opensecrets.org website](http://opensecrets.org/), which
details who contributes to which campaign. It’s useful stuff, but even a
hundred of their reports can’t compare to their old-fashioned,
dead-trees book [*Speaking
Freely*](http://www.opensecrets.org/pressreleases/2003/SpeakingFreely.asp),
which brilliantly details the big picture of how money politics actually
works. The author of the book, Larry Makinson, was in the room, but
instead of figuring out how to tell more stories like that, he was busy
worrying about how to make specific numbers come alive.

But what makes *Speaking Freely* so brilliant is that it shows specifics
aren’t the problem. It’s not that donors bribe politicians into changing
their vote — they rarely do — it’s that the entire campaign finance
system forces all our public officials to bend and scrape before
big-money donors, instead of actually listening to the voters.

Such clear analysis makes the solution clear as well: we need to get rid
of privately-financed elections altogether. And, in fact, there is an
organization doing just that. It’s called [Public
Campaign](http://www.publicampaign.org/) and, considering the enormous
odds it’s up against, it’s having incredible success. (Arizona,
Connecticut, and Maine have all adopted clean elections and smaller
projects have been started in six more states.) But the Sunlight
Foundation isn’t giving money to Public Campaign. To the contrary, many
of its top people used to work there.

Public Campaign is just one example; the larger point is that just as
Web 2.0 pixie dust doesn’t automatically make your web site into a
success, just making important data available won’t cause political
change. Justice Brandeis’s clever aphorism to the contrary, sunlight is
not in fact the best disinfectant; actual disinfectant is. Sunlight just
makes it easier for people to look at the pus.

* * * * *

**The Sunlight Foundation responds:** Many people from the Sunlight
Foundation have thoughtfully written to me. Aside from our general
disagreement about the value of the projects Sunlight engages in, they
make several specific points. Since they haven’t provided any letters
for publication, I’ll try to summarize them as fairly as I can:

-   **It’s not “a zero-sum game”.** The open data work that Sunlight
    funds helps projects like Public Campaign by giving them ammunition.
    Center for Responsive Politics data makes it into corruption stories
    in newspapers which, in turn, has made the issue of clean elections
    a more serious part of the public debate.

-   **Sunlight has many other projects.** They’ve provided serious
    grants to a number of organizations — including the [Center for
    Responsive Politics](http://www.opensecrets.org/) — and have a
    number of projects, including [hiring some
    bloggers](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/blog/), doing
    distributed journalism on [Congress’s Family
    Business](http://www.sunlightlabs.com/research/familybusiness/),
    getting 90 candidates to sign [their Punch Clock
    Agreeement](http://www.sunlightnetwork.com/punchclock), and even
    writing [an old-fashioned
    report](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/daysinsession).

-   **Sunlight has a good relation with Public Campaign.** Mike Klein
    has made donations to Public Campaign on his own; Ellen Miller
    started Public Campaign but left long before she joined Sunlight;
    Micah Sifry was already lowering the amount of time he spent working
    for Public Campaign before he joined Sunlight.

I don’t dispute any of these points, but I think the brunt of my
critique still stands. Changes to the culture of Washington must be
structural ones. These projects, while fun, fundamentally misunderstand
how institutions operate.


Identity Fetishism
==================

November 21, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/idfetish)

* * * * *

Marx wrote incisively about commodity fetishism—the tendency of people
to see only the results of production (commodities), ignoring the hours
of human labor that actually created them. The humanities seems to
suffer from something of the reverse problem: a tendency to be absorbed
by the names of big people and not seeing beyond to the ideas they
espouse.

The most extreme example is Leo Strauss, who encouraged his students to
put aside their prejudices and fully imerse themselves in the worlds and
minds of the greats. The greats were so great, Strauss suggested, that
if you disagree with them, you probably just don’t understand them well
enough.

But even other teachers of philosophy have the same problem, presenting
the views of X and Y even when X is pretty clearly wrong. Despite its
absurdities, students must learn to understand X’s view. This seems
fairly universal; even books like *What is the Meaning of it All?*,
which explains philosophy without the names or complex terminology,
still presents clearly bogus ideas on the same footing as more
reasonable ones.

In other fields, this pattern is less frequent, but still there for
whole courses of research. In sociology, papers must cite long-dead
patron theorists to lend their empirical research an air of legitimacy
by presenting it as a member of a recognized family. Even more recent
works, like Annette Lareau’s brilliant *Unequal Childhoods*, are at
pains to show how they adhere to a theoretical model (the recently-alive
Bourdieu in that case). In most other fields, the theorists take pains
to make sure their work is consistent with the evidence, not the other
way around.

Even in most humanities classes, the course content consists of a series
of papers making arguments. The goal of the class is to understand the
view of the authors and determine (in the best ones) to what extent you
agree or disagree.

This isn’t particularly unreasonable, but is a far cry from life in the
hard sciences, where usually there is an actual consensus on some
subject and otherwise there are a couple of named theories, each being
developed by a group of people.

Why the diference? First, is it perhaps hard science that’s in the
wrong? I don’t think so. The goal of science is to discover the truth
about the world. Truths remain true no matter who says them and it’s
unlikely that one person will discover the whole truth. Thus the pattern
of letting multiple people develop a theory and try to find evidence for
it to convince the others.

So why don’t the softer sciences follow the same model? The problem gets
worse the softer you get, which suggests the problem lies in the
softness itself. The problem is that without identities, one has to
judge the ideas themselves which, in a soft science is somewhat
difficult to do.

It’s easy in science to run an experiment and see if it proves a theory
true or false, it’s much harder to get consensus about a reasonable
theory of morality in philosophy. But it is easy to pick out the famous
in academy culture and assign their stuff.

Identity fetishism thrives in a world afraid to make its own judgments.
It exalts the thinkers of the past and, in doing so, diminishes its own
capacities. But science must march forward instead of backward and that
requires the daring to distinguish true from false.


Free Speech: Because We Can
===========================

November 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/becausewecan)

* * * * *

In the field of Constitutional Law, there are many pages spent trying to
come up with a reason for free speech. It’s about the “marketplace of
ideas” some say: by putting all claims and points of view out in the
open, the public can sort through and figure out the truth, leaving the
untruths to fall by the wayside. Others argue that free speech is
necessary for democracy, since voters must hear different opinions to
decide how to use their votes, and that since even non-political speech
can change people’s views, all speech must then be protected.

There are many more justifications like this — a limit on government
abuse, a policy to promote a more tolerant citizenship, etc. — but, like
most justifications, they all say we should permit free speech because
it allows us to do something else. And the frustrating thing about that
is that it suggests that free speech should not be permitted when it
doesn’t achieve those goals.

Theorists of free speech are, in general, fans of the idea (or at least
their market consists of fans) so they try to dance around this. “Oh
no,” the marketplace-of-ideas partisans say, “we weren’t suggesting that
obviously false statements could be prohibited because, after all, you
really never know when false statements could turn out to be true!”

But, as [something of a free speech
absolutist](http://bits.are.notabug.com/), it troubles me that such a
thing is even theoretically possible. And I worry that if others adopt
this theory, they may not be so stringent about the practical
requirements. The temptation to clamp down on free speech is always
strong; it’s probably not a sound idea to build the principle on such a
shaky foundation.

So I have my own justification for freedom of speech: because we can.
Human freedom is important, so we should try to protect it from
encroachment wherever possible. With most freedoms — freedom of motion,
freedom of exchange, freedom of action — permitting them in full would
cause some problems. People shouldn’t be free to walk into other
people’s bedrooms, take all their stuff, and then punch the poor victims
in the face. But hurling a bunch of epithets at the guy really isn’t so
bad.

Freedom of speech is one place where we can draw the line and say: all
of this is acceptable. There’s no further logic to it than that; freedom
of speech is not an *instrumental* value. Like all freedom, it’s
fundamental, and the only reason we happen to single it out is because
it’s more reasonable than all of the others.

Close readers will note that this theory doesn’t quite live up to my own
goals. By laying freedom of speech’s provision on top of our reasonable
ability to do so, I suggest that freedom of speech could be taken away
if providing it became unreasonable. But I think this is the right
choice: if people really, seriously started getting hurt because of
freedom of speech, it seems right for people to take the privilege away.
But, to be honest, I can’t even imagine how that might be possible.
Words just don’t genuinely wound, they’re always mediated by our
listening.

I do worry that people might try to stretch this justification — say
that continued free speech might destroy the war effort, or the
government, or civil society. But I have no problem destroying all of
those. It’s only the destruction of actual people that I worry about.

So here’s to free speech: because we can.


Bread and Cheese
================

November 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/breadandcheese)

* * * * *

It seems like every Western food culture has some combination of bread
and cheese as a meal. Americans, simple people, have your basic grilled
cheese. But Italians have the pizza. Then there’s the mac-and-cheese.
And of course Mexicans with their quesadilla. Then there’s the cheese
calzone. Not to mention cheese crepes. Throw in meat and you can also
count the famed cheeseburger.

What is so magical about this combination?


Why It Makes Sense to Bite the Hand that Feeds You
==================================================

November 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bitethehand)

* * * * *

[Errol
Morris](http://www.errolmorris.com/content/reexaminations/reexaminations1.html):

> 1.  Preventive bite. Hand is bound to betray you eventually. Get it
>     before it gets you. Remember, every hand is capable of naked
>     aggression.
>
> 2.  Preemptive bite. Hand is ready to do something. Just look at it.
>     You’ve got to protect yourself, don’t you?
>
> 3.  Keeps gums healthy.
>
> 4.  Hand less likely poisoned than food.
>
> 5.  Tastes good.
>
> 6.  Why not…?
>



A Trip to the Courthouse: Part 1
================================

November 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport)

* * * * *

The United State Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit is a
federal-looking building nestled in among the offices and shops and
business parks of San Francisco’s downtown. Large marble walls and
staircases try desperately to send the message that what goes on here is
of paramount importance, that the decisions made in these halls will
reverberate throughout a large part of the country: Alaska, Arizona,
California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington — the
largest of any appeals court.

But, this morning, the courtroom tells a different story. With people
packed like Sardines into a room not much bigger than a bedroom in a San
Francisco apartment, with one of the judges missing and replaced —
without explanation — with a large television, and with hesitant,
stammering public defenders arguing their cases against only
slightly-less-hesitant civil servants, I briefly wondered if I was in
the wrong room.

The first case I saw appeared to be a man requesting asylum in the US
from his home country. I missed large portions of the case, but as I
paid attention, the facts started coming out. He wanted asylum from
persecution because he was gay. But the country he was hiding from
didn’t exactly have a record of persecution of gays. And the only
evidence of persecution he could point to was that a couple people on
the street once called him gay.

The next case seemed a little better for the non-government guy. It was
about a man who accused of defrauding Medicare by double-billing. He
noted that the Court had changed the law during the case; instead of
just requiring the jury to find *whether* double-billing had occurred,
it now required the jury to find how much. But they’d made that change
after the trial, so he’d never had a chance to present any evidence on
how much double-billing had occurred. His lawyer asked for a chance to
hold a hearing to present the evidence.

“Do you have the evidence?” a judge asked. The lawyer responded that he
didn’t, because he was a public defender and needed to hire a
professional accountant to look through the math, but couldn’t afford to
without a judge’s permission, and the judge denied his request at the
same time he denied the hearing on the subject. But, he explained, the
government’s accountant had admitted on the stand that there were
mistakes in the math he presented, although he didn’t know what impact
they had. Couldn’t he just get a trial to assess the math? The judges
didn’t seem to think so.

If the judges weren’t going to give a victory on that case, they really
weren’t on the next one. A man who lived with his mom in Massachusetts
was challenging the government’s search of his storage locker in
Arizona. His lawyer sparred with the judges for some time about the
details of Fourth Amendment law. Then the government’s lawyer took the
stage. “Let me tell you about this man,” he said. “As a condition of his
parole, he wasn’t permitted to have any guns. But he kept one gun, the
machine gun he’d had since he was a kid — he called it his baby. The
government got a tip and showed up on his doorstep and he practically
handed them the gun and then told them to go away. It was raining
outside and he wouldn’t let them into his house. They searched the house
and found another machine gun kit.”

“In Court, he was asked if he had any more guns. His lawyer, acting on
his client’s behalf, insisted that the Court didn’t have jurisdiction
because all the other guns were in a storage locker in Arizona. After
the lawyer said that, we had to search the locker in Arizona. There we
found a huge shipping crate. To take the crate into evidence, the
government had to inventory it. There we found 44 flamethrowers, 22
submachine guns, 5 hand grenades, and a handful of pistols. We had to
call in the bomb squad and check over everything. And he’s arguing that
the Fourth Amendment doesn’t permit us to open that crate.”

Later, I heard some of the lawyers on a different case joking. “Once
opposing counsel says flamethrowers, you’ve lost. Doesn’t matter how
good your case is. You’re never going to recover from that.”

It was into this environment that Larry Lessig stepped. Lessig has been
thinking about the implications of copyright law for most of his career.
He has spent months practicing to argue before the Supreme Court and
other lesser courts. He spent the weekend practicing this case with
other faculty members at the Stanford Law School. He spent the morning
pacing the halls, going over his notes one last time. And as he strode
into the Courtroom that morning and begun his argument before the Court,
unlike every other lawyer who had presented, he didn’t stumble over a
single word.

In some ways, this should have been home territory for Lessig. It was
his own Court, right in his own town of San Francisco. And as he paced
the halls, he was continually interrupted by former students of his at
Stanford Law, who had gone on to careers as lawyers in the area, which
had brought them here, to argue before the Court just like him. And,
perhaps he figured, the judges would welcome a break from the endless
parade of petty complaints to his arguments about the big issues — the
First Amendment, the Progress clause, copyright. Weren’t things like
that why they became judges in the first place?

Perhaps not.

*[continued in part 2](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport2)*


A Trip to the Courthouse: Part 2
================================

November 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport2)

* * * * *

*[continued from part 1](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport)*

“For a hundred and eighty-six years America had an opt-in system of
copyright,” Lessig began. “Copyright was not granted automatically but
was limited to works that were published. And then only to those with
notice. And then only to those published with notice that were deposited
and registered promptly. And to those [published,] marked, deposited,
and registered, the copyright still had to be renewed after 28 years.
Under this system, nearly fifty percent of published work entered the
public domain immediately and ninety-three percent within twenty-eight
years.”

“Following the 1976 Copyright Act, that all changed and copyright was
granted automatically, for a full term, as soon as a work was fixed in a
tangible form. No longer was it necessary to published, deposit, mark,
or renew. Copyright moved from an opt-in system to an opt-out. And under
this system, zero percent of published work will enter the public domain
for at least a hundred years.”

“This is a radical change — perhaps the most radical change — to
copyright law, going from ninety-three percent of works going in the
public domain to zero. And the result is a huge increase in ‘orphaned
works’ — works whose copyright holder cannot even be located to ask
permission.”

“In *Eldred v. Ashcroft*, the Supreme Court ruled that copyright only
needed judicial review when the ‘traditional contours’ of copyright law
were changed. This is clearly a change to copyright’s traditional
contours and thus deserves a chance for judicial review.”

The government’s lawyer — slick, but not as slick as Lessig — argued
that the Court was referring to only two traditional contours: the right
to fair use (which allows things like the use of small snippets of
copyrighted material and limited copies for educational use) and the
“idea/expression dichotomy” (which says that you can’t copyright ideas
but only a particular way of expressing them).

Lessig responded that this was absurd. If the government ruled that
cartoons featuring the prophet Mohammed could not receive copyrights,
the law would clearly be subject to First Amendment review, even though
neither fair use nor idea/expression were touched. Similarly, the change
from opt-out to opt-in deserves review.

There were three judges, as required by law to hear all federal appeals.
The one on the right, who was live via satellite, didn’t say a word the
entire time. The one on the left didn’t ask more than a question or two.
The judge in the middle was responsible for most of the questions. And
she did not appear to get it.

“How is this different from *Eldred*?” she asked.

A quarter of the way in to the argument, she handed a slip of paper to
her aide. Her aide scurried away and came back with a thick document.
She looked down at it and then looked up.

“You were the lawyer in *Eldred* as well,” she asked Lessig.

“Yes, your honor.”

“How is this different from *Eldred*?”

“In *Eldred*,” Lessig explained, trying again, “the issue was whether
Congress could continue expanding the length of copyright in order to
keep Mickey Mouse from going into the public domain. The Court — Justice
Ginsburg channelling Justice Scalia — said that since Congress had been
doing this forever they could keep doing it. But in this case, we’re
talking about a new change, one that effects orphaned works — works for
who the copyright holder cannot be located.”

“Which wouldn’t include Mickey Mouse, because every can find Disney?”
the judge asked.

“Precisely,” Lessig replied.

During the government’s rebuttal, the judge asked who was lobbying
against this change in copyright law. “Well,” the government’s lawyer
replied, “um, I suspect it was people very much like the ones you see
here today.” (“Yeah,” Lessig scoffed later, “I was testifying in
Congress against the bill back when I was fifteen!”)

By the same token, the judge asked Lessig about what solutions to the
problem he would expect were the law ruled unconstitutional. “There are
many possible solutions,” Lessig replied, drawing a picture of a network
of people fighting this issue in all branches of government. There was
this lawsuit, of course, but there was also a bill introduced by local
Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren to require a one-dollar renewal fee (based,
Lessig did not say, on a *New York Times* op-ed he had written), there
was a series of hearings by the U.S. Copyright Office on the orphaned
works problem, which concluded “The orphan works problem is real. …
Legislation is necessary to provide a meaningful solution to the orphan
works problem as we know it today.” and provided several proposals.

“Your time is up,” the judge said, before the red light saying his time
was up had gone on, and Lessig quietly packed up his papers and filed
out, half the courtroom following behind him.

“Congratulations,” Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle (the man who
Lessig is filing this lawsuit on behalf of) said to Lessig, shaking his
hand and smiling broadly. Lessig smiled back, then posed politely for
photos with Kahle and his associate Rick Prelinger. The well-wishers
soon streamed out until it was just Lessig and his fellow law school
lawyers. The smile disappeared from Lessig’s face. “They didn’t get it,”
Lessig said downcast.

“Oh, I think they were getting it towards the end there,” one of the
lawyers said, trying to cheer Lessig up. “No,” he replied, “they
weren’t.” “Well,” another lawyer chimed in, “to write an opinion they’ll
have to read the briefs and then they’ll see your argument.” “No,” he
explained, “they can just tell a clerk which way to write the opinion
and have them do it.”

“Actually, our best hope now is that they won’t write an opinion at all
and then *Golan* [a related case in a different Circuit] will go the
other way and then we’ll have a circuit split.” (A circuit split is when
two different circuit courts rule different ways on the same issue.
Usually the Supreme Court then has to step in to resolve the
disagreement.)

“Well, at least your case didn’t have any flamethrowers,” someone said,
trying to lighten the mood. But Lessig just wasn’t in the mood.


Lazy Backup
===========

November 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lazybackup)

* * * * *

If there’s one thing good UI designers know, it’s that the best UI is
not to have one at all. Applications should just save, security should
just work, and computers should just backup.

Apparently that last task is a harder than it appears, since I still
haven’t found decent backup software for Unix (OS X and GNU/Linux).

Here is how the software should work:

1.  I install it.

2.  I point it at some storage server (ideally Amazon EC2 and S3, but if
    that’s too hard then a GNU/Linux server with a large drive).

3.  I give it a maximum space limit (e.g. store no more than 200GB).

4.  I give it a maximum up-bandwidth limit (e.g. use no more than 5K/s).

5.  I tell it to run.

From then on, it should just work. In the background, it will upload my
files to the server using only 5K/s of bandwidth. If I get disconnected
from the Internet or reboot my computer, when I get back on it will pick
up where it left off. If a file changes it will only send the diff and
store that as well. When I run out of disk space it will delete the old
diffs.

It will preserve all the Unix ACLs and permissions and weird Mac OS X
resource forks and stuff so that if my drive ever dies I can make a full
bootable restore from the backup.

Does this software exist?

The closest I’ve seen is
[rdiff-backup](http://www.nongnu.org/rdiff-backup/), which is very nice
but fails to automate some key steps.

If it doesn’t exist, let me know if you’re interested in writing it (a
wrapper around `rdiff-backup` to do it shouldn’t be too hard, I would
think). I’d be willing to offer a bounty.


Two Conceptions of Taste
========================

December 1, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2taste)

* * * * *

Taste is difficult to define and even harder to justify, so let us just
take it for granted for a moment. (Alright, for those who don’t get the
picture, here’s a quick attempt: taste is the ability to create
elegance. The people who made the iPod clearly have taste; the people
who made Windows do not.) Unfortunately for me, it seems like a lot of
people in the US don’t have much taste. (Try watching the infographics
on the network evening news, for example.) But even among people who
have taste, I’ve noticed there are two kinds: positive and negative.

Negative taste is the ability to tell when something is bad. Positive
taste is the ability to make something that is good. Indeed, one might
even say that there is only one kind of taste and positive taste is
simply negative taste plus skills. But since taste is generally inferred
from creations, it’s probably simpler to treat them as two different
things.

People with negative taste can make things that look really nice, but
they also look very plain. I think the founders of Google have negative
taste. John Gruber, as far as I can tell, mostly does. Same with Paul
Graham. (As do I, for that matter.) People with negative taste make
things by trying something very simple and then stripping away pieces
until it looks good. They can detect goodness, but not create it, so
they’re limited to designs with very few variables, because then they
can go thru all the options and pick out the ones that look OK.

People with positive taste, on the other hand, can make things that
genuinely look good. This gives them a lot more freedom in their designs
(they can use colors other than white!). Truly good designers have
positive taste. Unfortunately for people like us, Apple seems to have
hired most of them and put them to work building fairly bland web sites.

Of course, taste applies to far more fields than design. One could apply
the same idea to writing. Positive taste writers can write beautiful
flowing prose that looks you in. Negative taste writers can only write
beautiful things by staying simple.

People with negative taste can recognize people with positive taste and
hire them. People with no taste, on the other hand, fail to see the
difference, resulting in disasters like the graphic design department of
American Airlines.

People with negative taste can also be critics, which brings us to Joe
Clark’s [famous
comment](http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/w3c-wai-ig/2004JulSep/0237.html)
“Actually, no, it is not the responsibility of the critic to solve the
problem. Pauline Kael was not expected to rewrite and redirect the films
she disliked.”

People with negative taste can pick out the bad movies. They just can’t
make great ones.

*Followups:* John Siracusa,
[Hypercritical](http://arstechnica.com/staff/fatbits/2009/05/hypercritical.ars)
(2009)


Never Back to School
====================

December 2, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stanfordagain)

* * * * *

When guests came to visit us at Stanford, they’d always comment on the
beauty of our campus — the copious greenery, the modern decorations, the
classic architecture. I used to take them at their word. I always
thought Stanford was a very pretty campus. Now I realize that it was
merely bright.

Coming back to Stanford after living in San Francisco is an odd
experience, because the place seems so obviously much more fake. You
don’t notice when you’re in it, but Stanford is a real wonder of a
bubble. Surrounded by a moat of trees, it pretends to be its own
self-sufficient city, complete with its own name (Stanford, California
is not technically a city, but only a “census-designated place”; it has
its own zip code, nonetheless). It has its own food, housing, public
transit system, gas station (this is California), police force, job
openings, newspaper, and events calendar. Most large universities have
such things, of course, but they mesh with and supplement the outside
world. At Stanford, despite being in the center of Silicon Valley, you’d
hardly know the outside world existed.

Everything here is immaculately clean. There is rarely weather, just
constant sun from a cloudless sky (the sky kindly rains only at night so
as not to disturb anyone). There are no outsiders, just scrupulously
examined teachers, carefully selected students, and well-behaved
maintenance staff (who are not paid a living wage, despitee the
proteests of generous-minded students).

Coming back to Stanford, wandering its august halls once again, it feels
so strange. I lived here for a full year; this should feel like coming
home. But while I recognize it all — not much changed while I was gone —
it doesn’t feel like home at all. Everything seems, well, smaller.

Part of that, obviously, is literally true: I’m physically bigger now,
so things seem smaller in comparison. But it also feels psychologically
smaller, like after living in San Francisco I can no longer accept this
simulated city as a reality. Instead, I’m constantly seeing it in its
context in the wider world.

The result is that everything feels like a bizarre show, played out on
this phony stage. Beautiful guys in pajamas, talking to beautiful girls
in less. Party music blaring. Kids scooting elegantly by on bicycles.
Before I just thought this was the strange reality of the world I was
dropped into. Now I see it as just another act.

I went to the top of the large tower in the middle of the Stanford
campus, something I’d never found the time to do while I was a student.
And looking out, the school splayed before me, I noticed something odd.
The beaultiful Stanford buildings, so varied and complex at ground
level, all look like big red rectangles from the sky. Perhaps Stanford
is one of those things you really have to be in to genuinely see.


Drop Out
========

December 3, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfdropout)

* * * * *

I was wondering what I was going to find for today’s Sunday Bonus Post.
Luckily, at the last minute, the *San Francisco Chronicle* stepped in to
save me:

> Aaron Swartz dropped out of high school after one year to study on his
> own. Then he dropped out of college after one year to seek his
> high-tech fortune. He was still in his teens a year later when he hit
> the jackpot, selling his startup in October to Wired Digital for an
> undisclosed but lottery-like payout.
>
> With his boyish mien and more geek credentials than engineers twice
> his age, the suddenly wealthy Swartz belongs to a new generation of
> young, brainy geeks who began booting up and logging on when their
> friends were still watching “Sesame Street.” Before they were old
> enough to drive, they landed paying gigs. Now that another high-tech
> boom is heating up Silicon Valley, more of these technologically
> developed but underage techies are dropping out and starting up.
>
> […]
>
> “Everything that would get you detention at school will get you
> funding in Silicon Valley,” said Paul Saffo, a valley forecaster and
> essayist who has been exploring technological change and its impact on
> business and society for more than two decades.
>
> […]
>
> Fancy new car? “I don’t know how to drive,” Swartz wrote on his blog,
> Raw Thought. Big house in the suburbs? “I like living in small
> apartments.” Expensive clothes? “I’ve worn a T-shirt and jeans
> practically every day of my life.” Hanging with the cool kids? “I’m so
> shy I don’t even hang out with the people I know now.”

(Jessica Guynn, [Log on, drop out, cash in: These top techies weren’t
leery about leaving
school](http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2006/12/03/BUGTFMNO261.DTL))

Excuse my self-indulgence.


The Genius is in the Details
============================

December 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smartabstractions)

* * * * *

As best as we can tell, the human brain works by mastering a specific
thing and then “giving it a name”, wrapping the whole thing up into a
bundle and pushing it down a level, so that things can then be built
with it as a component. You see this all over the place — it’s how
science works, it’s how you program, it’s even how people deal with
their friends (“let’s do the mall again”).

So it would seem natural to think that smart people would work on a very
high level, dealing not in details but in huge abstractions. They would
have turned everything into a component, no longer worrying about its
details, and built things out of the results.

Bizarrely, this seems entirely untrue. The smartest people I know
disdain abstractions, preferring to speak in concrete specifics. Take
Paul Buchheit, the genius behind Gmail. When he talks about building web
applications, he doesn’t think about high-level things like the
underlying semantic structure of the data — instead he talks about the
little “heads” that read data off of the hard disk and how fast they can
move.

Another friend, also incredibly bright, doesn’t refer to other people
that way. He doesn’t say “oh, he’s an expert in X” or “he’s really smart
about X”; instead he says “he’s thought a lot about X” — breaking down
the abstractions of expertise and intelligence into something much more
concrete: spending time thinking about something.

At first glance these seem like mistakes. Why should a brilliant web app
programmer be thinking about hard disk heads? Isn’t that something
someone else should take care of? And why is my smart friend only
concerned with how much time someone has spent on something? Aren’t
there other factors involved?

But if you look the other direction, you see the same pattern. Clueless
business guys love speaking in big abstractions, talking about
“information superhighways” that act as “more efficient content delivery
systems” that will “monetize the genre” by “disintermediating the legacy
players”. These guys are speaking exactly as you would expect smart
people to — thinking at a high level, working with the big ideas — yet
the things they say are so incredibly stupid that they either don’t mean
anything or mean something that’s actually impossible.

So what’s going on here? As we noted at the beginning, the brain works
by mastering the details and *then* giving them a name. But the business
guys took the easy way out: they just mastered the names. If you asked
them exactly how a content delivery system worked, they wouldn’t be able
to tell you. They know only the high-level thing, with none of the
details.

And it’s the details that make it so interesting — and so powerful.
Anyone can master the names of big concepts and combine them like so
many puzzle pieces; it’s knowing how they work that takes time. And the
smart people have made that investment. So perhaps it’s just natural
that they want to stay it a little closer to it than most.


The City with No Heart
======================

December 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingla)

* * * * *

> [Where’s the heart of LA?]
>
> CAL: The Hollywood sign.
>
> DANNY: It’s the most viewed sign in the world, it beats the Eiffel
> Tower. And don’t say the Santa Monica pier.
>
> CAL: Downtown.
>
> DANNY: Downtown isn’t where L.A. is.
>
> CAL: It’s not. L.A.’s on Sunset between Doheny and Highland. It’s the
> Sunset Strip, and Wes knew that because he put that right in the
> title.
>
> DANNY: Hey, I would love to do the Strip, but if you think about it,
> it’s made up almost entirely… of billboard ads.

(Aaron Sorkin, “The Option Period,” *Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip*)

* * * * *

Flying over Los Angeles is strange. For a while there’s nothing but
mountains. Then a few curving strips of conformist suburbia. And then,
all of a sudden, there it is. Rows and rows of building with no apparent
structure or direction, just going everywhere at once. Unlike every
other city I’ve seen from the air, LA has no gradient surrounding a
downtown. It just suddenly appears and then is simply there.

Downtown looks about the way you’d expect. Lots of tall buildings,
studded with odd landmarks like the new Gehry-designed concert hall and
a giant ocean liner-looking building which we determined to be the DMV.
(“Only in California does the DMV get its own ocean liner,” someone
says.) But this wasn’t really LA, my guide explained. “Downtown is just
hollowed out factories and sweatshops. Gentrification is coming, but
it’s only at the very early stages.” We pass an American Apparel
sweatshop. “American Apparel is a Rebel Company” the staid building
reads in Spanish.

We zip past old and new buildings while zooming on the freeway and head
to Venice, a land of small streets and surprisingly-elegant beach
shacks. The famed Venice Beach looks just like you’d imagine — LA always
makes you think you are imagining — with shirtless skateboarders and
gritty little shops and the beautiful blue ocean up against the clear
blue sky — both so vast, so endless.

I lie down on the sand and close my eyes. When you’re trying to relax,
everyone always says to imagine you’re on the beach by the ocean with
the sun streaming down upon your face. But here I actually am and I
still can’t relax. Instead, I wonder about the fractal nature of
coastlines — does their length grow with out bound or simply converge as
you measure them more finely? ([It grows without
bound.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_Long_Is_the_Coast_of_Britain%3F_Statistical_Self-Similarity_and_Fractional_Dimension))

* * * * *

My host is danah boyd, the beautiful young academic superstar who has
won fame and fortune formalizing the teens on MySpace, then reporting
her findings at conferences in wildly colorful outfits with youthful
enthusiasm. She’s living an academic dream — a one bedroom house by the
beach filled with books, with a handsome but quiet young boyfriend to
drop by on occasion.

But such a life is not all relaxation. She’s editing special editions of
journals, keynoting conferences, submitting papers hither and yon,
consulting on teen issues for major corporations, and interviewing kids
for her research. Even *The O’Reilly Factor* is in on the racket, asking
her, in that rhetorical way O’Reilly has of interviewing guests, whether
MySpace is a dangerous den of online sexual predators. (It is never
mentioned that O’Reilly’s parent company has purchased MySpace.)

danah delights in pushing academic boundaries: skipping classes,
skipping town, spelling her name in lower case, wearing crazy clothes,
studying the subcultural and new. And the rest of the field is
scrambling to catch up with her, finally holding conferences and
submitting papers on the sites she’s been studying for years. I should
become an academic, she says. Shake up the system just like her. But why
join the system in the first place?, I say.

She’s got a fellowship down here this year along with Cory Doctorow, who
shows up, arms wide, in a beaten leather jacket and a skullish t-shirt.
We grab barbecue down the street, taking Cory’s car (the first one he’s
bought in his 35 years), outfitted with fuzzy seats and new plates that
read “COPYFYT.”

Cory hates San Francisco, but loves it here, where he gets to teach
classes with names like “Pwned: Is everyone on this campus a copyright
criminal?” The freeway is fast, he says, the light rail usable, the
cities surprisingly walkable. Disneyland is close by and there is plenty
of ’50s kitsch. And it’s far cheaper living here than in London.

Cory is his usual flurry of activity — working on six books, teaching
two classes, running one of the most popular blogs, fighting for our
digital civil liberties, while still managing to keep up with all the
gossip. He hands me an advance proof of a book to read and recommends
another he’s in the middle of. And on his way out he stands, framed in
the doorway, and offers me a piece of advice.

“You know,” he says, “*Wired* really isn’t so bad. It’s an exciting time
in tech industry — the cost of starting a company has fallen drastically
— and you’re at the center of it. I would have loved to have a job at
*Wired* when I was 18.” “Wired was very different when you were 18,” I
say. “Yeah, I suppose so,” he says. “I guess I wouldn’t want a job there
now — but then again I wouldn’t want a job *anywhere*.”

And then he’s off.

* * * * *

As Cory leaves Jeremy Iversen arrives. Iversen is an incredibly odd
fellow. With a background in everything from investment banking to
neurotheology, he came to my attention with his 2006 book *[High School
Confidential](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743283635)*. With a
novelist’s snark and an ethnographer’s attention to character and
institutional detail, he went undercover to a Southern Californian high
school for a half a year and wrote the whole thing down with a rare
authorial brilliance. ([My
review.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverlearning))

Now the book’s out and he’s moved on again. This time he’s trying to
join Hollywood, perhaps play himself in the movie version of the book.
He is sleek and abnormally attractive, but I learn this is the result of
a spectacularly careful regimen. Every four hours he takes a carefully
measured amount of food out of a cryopack in his car, pretty much the
only food he is permitted. Then he follows a daily three-page
jargon-laden series of instructions from his trainer about which
exercises to perform and how at the gym. This, combined with cold
reading and audition classes, is now his job.

It seems like a waste, but just like danah likes messing with
institutions, Jeremy likes trying new things. “I’ve done a fiction book,
I’ve done a nonfiction book, I’m done with writing,” he says. Fair
enough; Jeremy amazes me with his many talents. Aside from his good
looks, his thoughtful eye, and his talent for writing, he’s one of the
smarter people I’ve spoken to lately, cracking jokes about Yugoslav
loyalty and information-theoretic channel errors.

He also has amazing interpersonal skills. While danah and Cory bowled me
over with their energy, leading me to sit quietly while they braindump
news and gossip, Jeremy’s energy somehow invites my own, leading me to
crack jokes and make snarky comments right along with him. Perhaps this
guy truly can do anything. Although that only leads to another question:
why?

* * * * *

I hop in Jeremy’s car (the very same the kids in his book were in!) and
he takes me on a tour of the city. First stop is Santa Monica and the
Santa Monica Pier, home to a sewage treatment plant (which lots of
signage brags about) and the fortune telling machine that kicked off the
plot in *Big* (I didn’t have a quarter to get my fortune, sadly). The
crosswalk machines here talk and the stupid shopping mall jobs inspire
television pilots. There are large topiary dinosaurs along a promenade
with gingerbread houses underneath them to suggest Christmas. (Since the
weather doesn’t change, the city has to indicate the season in more
blatant ways.) There is an entire store dedicated to selling things to
geeks, with golden chess pieces mixed in among the lightsabers and *Lord
of the Rings* figurines. The wealthy pretty things stroll back and
forth.

Meanwhile in Westwood, home of UCLA, we see more shops and [Fox
Theater](http://cinematreasures.org/theater/246/), home to many
important movie openings. The students sit in cafes, pretending to work
but actually checking Flickr, while Jeremy insists I get a tazo milk tea
with boba. I do, against my instincts, and, to my surprise, it’s
actually quite good. Then we go back to strolling around LA’s imitation
of a college town. In most places college towns are kind of a step up
from the surrounding environs, but in LA it seems the town is trying to
slum down a bit to fit the mold.

We head to Beverly Hills, singing the appropriate songs (*living in
Beverly Hills*), and get out to stroll along the famed Rodeo Drive. [A
giant nude
torso](http://www.publicartinla.com/sculptures/graham_torso.html)
inexplicably welcomes us to a strip with shops so upscale that the
streetlights have been replaced by chandeliers in glass boxes.
Well-dressed women carry their fashionably tiny dogs in Prada bags while
trendy young people sit in trendy restaurants, looking vaguely unhappy.

Side streets curve off into a world of cobblestone steps even more
immaculately clean than the main drag — not a speck of dirt can be found
anywhere. And then we find ourselves in the most bizarre three-story
mall contraption, with an elevator that goes two floors above any
surrounding buildings, three restaurants bathing unhappy people in pink,
orange, and green light respectively, closed shops selling pink, orange,
and green boxes, and a large glassed-in bedroom suspended literally in
the center of it all, with no apparent way to get in. Jeremy was
convinced we were in some kind of adventure game — if only we deliver
the pink boxes to the people in pink and so on, we’d unlock the elevator
which would bring us to the key to get into the magic bedroom. But then
the polygons stopped rendering so smoothly and we decided to move on, as
I begun to wonder if I’d stepped into some Virtual Reality simulation.

* * * * *

Everything in LA looks so, well, cinematic. I always thought that filmed
stuff looked better than my stuff because they used fancy lights,
cameras, and lenses to give it that more lushful aesthetic. But
apparently all you really need to do is turn your camera on in LA —
everything here gives off that hyperreal, oversaturated vibe.

And the people are all characters too. When I went down to Venice Beach,
I saw attractive women sunbathing on towels while reading scripts. While
walking back, I heard a couple guys excited that the casting director
had actually called them back this time. The only other people I saw on
the street with identifiable occupations (and there are a shocking
number of people wandering around the street in the middle of the day
with no identifiable occupation) were the immigrant landscapers busily
trimming hedges on the houses of their betters.

I walked a block too far on the way back and ran into a more dingy
neighborhood by a runned-down church. I looked around, trying to get my
bearings, and a poor-looking black man on a bicycle with a cup rode up.
“Sorry,” I said, assuming he wanted me to place some money in his cup.
“Can I help you find anything?” he asked. “No,” I said. “What’re you
doing?” he asked. “Just looking around,” I said. “Looking for anything
in particular?” he asked. “No,” I said. “Looking for… crack?” he asked.
“No,” I said again, and he biked off.

“Crack is our number one industry,” Jeremy says, “with entertainment and
shipping as our secondary sectors.” Apparently the whole city does coke,
perhaps the one thing that unites these disparate neighborhoods, this
collection of varied enclaves each with their own name and culture that
we call Los Angeles. Not all of them, Jeremy explains, are even part of
Los Angeles City. Some of them have received special dispensation to
carve out their little plot of land and get their own mayor. Santa
Monica even elected a Green.

* * * * *

We head towards Sunset, stopping to see a large bubbling pit of tar in
the middle of the city, right next to the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art (LACMA), where even more high society people are standing around
looking unhappy, glassed in from the rest of the world — and the tar.

We also stop to see the world’s tallest Christmas tree at The Grove
shopping mall. Aside from one of the early flagship Apple stores, the
Grove also has a trolley to take people around the outdoor mall. There’s
little objective need for the trolley — the mall isn’t that big — but,
as Jeremy says, it just adds to the surreality. To complete the picture,
I couldn’t resist purchasing a cinnamon sugar pretzel.

And then we head to Sunset. There is the Laugh Factory, where Michael
Richards recently dealt a large blow to his career. There are trendy
clubs and music spots. And there are, of course, billboards; plenty of
billboards, advertising this and that as the street curves every which
way.

Soon things start to calm down and it’s time for Jeremy to drop me off
and hit the gym. We turn around, waving goodbye to all that. “And that’s
LA!” he says, as I clutch my chest and feel like my head is about to
explode.

* * * * *

The afternoon before I have to leave, I’m lying on the couch, my
headache failing to fade. Time rolls forward and I notice from the
orange glow leaking through the window that im gonna miss the sunset yet
again. I hop out and run the four blocks to the beach as fast as I can,
dodging traffic all the way.

When I get there the sun has fallen below the horizon but framed before
me is the majestic beach picture I’ve always seen in photos. The
darkened sand, the glowing water, the crimson orangered strip fading up
and to the edges, as if the sun had set directly in front of where I’m
now facing.

I run towards the water and the lights and sounds and people of the city
all fall away and I find my self entirely alone with the ocean. The
waves run right up to the edge of my toes but don’t touch them. I stand,
its colors and sounds enveloping my entire field of vision, its scent
filling my nostrils. I breathe in deeply.

The reflected sunlight before me refracts to form a perfect rainbow,
strips of dark red fading into orange fading into yellow then light blue
then blue. And for one beautiful moment, before the whole thing fades
away into an inky blackness, the colors are laid out perfectly, just the
way I’ve seen them in prisms and diagrams so many times before, a
beautiful sympathy of color. And then my head really does explode, the
beauty sending shockwaves through my body.

That is how I will remember LA: this beautiful strip of sunset.


Competition of Experimentation?
===============================

December 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/compvexp)

* * * * *

It should be clear to anyone who has studied the topic that the way to
drive innovation forward is to have lots of small groups of people each
trying different things to succeed. In *Guns, Germs, and Steel*, for
example, we see that certain societies succeed because geography breaks
them up into chunks and prevents any one person with bad ideas from
getting control of too much, while other societies fail because their
whole territory can too easily be captured by an idiot.

It might at first seem more efficient to let the whole territory be
captured by a genius, but a moment’s reflection will show that there are
few geniuses whose brainpower can match the combined results of many
independent experiments. This has [fairly obvious applications to
business](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googradient) and other fields,
but for a moment let’s just think about the concept itself.

This idea is often presented as a defense of competition and the
capitalist market system that embraces it. Innovation only happens, such
people say, when lots of people are competing against each other for the
prizes of success. In a communist country, where Big State decides what
will be worked on and how, there is no incentive to innovate. Only in a
country like ours, where the victor gets the spoils, can new technology
be developed.

And yet we also know that competition is a terrible way to get people do
well. In *No Contest: The Case Against Competition* (now out in [an
elegant 20th anniversary
edition](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0395631254)) we see dozens of
studies that show that, by all sorts of metrics, people’s performance
(and enjoyment) goes down when they are forced to compete. Even worse,
it goes down most notably for creative tasks — precisely the kind of
thing involved in innovation.

How do we resolve the contradiction? The key is to notice that
competition, especially market competition, isn’t the only way to
encourage experimentation. And that’s often hard to do, because
typically market competition is treated as the only sensible form of
competition and competition as the only sensible form of
experimentation. But that’s not at all the case.

Instead of providing a prize for winner, we could provide rewards to
everyone who tries. And that actually makes sense — not only because
[prizes also decrease productivity and
creativity](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618001816) — but also because,
when it comes to experimentation, it’s not really your fault if the
experiment doesn’t work. In fact, we want to encourage people to try
crazy things that might not work, which is exactly why rewards are so
counterproductive.

But even if you don’t give an explicit prize, competition is still
unhealthy. Contrary to what the apologists for market theology would
like you to believe, people do not work better when they’re terrified of
the guy next to them finding the solution first. Which is why we should
look at this as simply experimentation, not competition.

Experimentation can certainly be carried out cooperatively. Imagine many
different scientists in a lab, each trying different ideas during the
day, swapping notes and tips over lunch, perhaps joining together to
form small groups for certain experiments, or perhaps helping with
little pieces of other projects in which they have particular expertise.
Each scientist may disagree on which is the right direction to pursue,
but that doesn’t make them enemies.

That’s the way that science progresses. And, if you let it, other things
too.


Business “Ethics”
=================

December 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bizethics)

* * * * *

*Moral Mazes* (one of my very favorite books) tells the story of a
company, chosen essentially at random, and through careful investigation
from top to bottom explains precisely how it operates, with the end
result of explaining how so many well-intentioned people can end up
committing so much evil.

This week’s scene takes place inside a textile processing plant at Weft
Corporation, where the company’s poor low-paid workers are suffering
from byssinosis. Byssinosis, also called Brown Lung Disease, is when
your lungs fill up with cotton dust. Eventually your throat closes up
and you suffocate to death. The company insists the whole thing is a
stunt made up by Ralph Nader and other liberal do-gooders. But one day
they change their tune:

> Weft, as well as all the other large and medium-sized American textile
> companies, was actually addressing the cotton dust problem, but in a
> characteristically indirect way. As part of a larger modernization
> effort, the firm invested \$20 million in a few plants where
> executives knew such an investment would make money. … The investment
> had the side benefit of reducing cotton dust levels … One manager who
> was in charge of the project … comments on whether dust control was a
> principal factor in the decision…:
>
> > No, definitely not. Would any sane, rational man spend \$15 million
> > for a 2 percent return? … Now it does improve the dust levels, but
> > it was that if we don’t invest the money now, we would be in a
> > desperate [competitive] position fifteen years from now. … It was on
> > these bases that the decision was made.
>
> Publicly, of course, Weft Corporation, as do many other firms, claims
> that the money was spent entirely to eliminate dust, evidence of its
> corporate good citizenship. Privately, executives admit that without
> the productive return, they would not have—indeed, given the
> constraints under which they operate—could not have spent the money.
> And they have not done so in several other plants and only with great
> reluctance, if at all, in sections of otherwise renovated plants where
> it is more difficult to … achieve simultaneous cost and dust
> reduction.

(Robert Jackall, *Moral Mazes*, 158f)

What does Jackall mean that the executives “could not have spent the
money … given the constraints under which they operate”? Another story
in the book about the chemical corporation Alchemy illustrates his
point:

> Consider, for instance, the case of a large coking plant of the
> chemical company. [Coking is a chemical process for distilling coal.]
> Coke making requires a giant battery to cook the coke slowly and
> evenly for long periods; the battery is the most significant piece of
> capital equipment in a coking plant. In 1975, the plant’s battery
> showed signs of weakening and certain managers at corporate
> headquarters had to decide whether to invest \$6 million to restore
> the battery to top form. Clearly, because of the amount of money
> involved, this was a gut decision.
>
> No decision was made. The CEO had sent the word out to defer all the
> unnecessary capital expenditures to give the corporation cash reserves
> for other investments. So the managers allocated small amounts of
> money to patch the battery up until 1979, when it collapsed entirely.
> This brought the company into breach of contract with a steel producer
> and into violation of various Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
> pollution regulations. The total bill, including lawsuits and now
> federally mandated repairs to the battery, exceeded \$100 million. I
> have heard figures as high as \$150 million, but because of “creative
> accounting,” no one is sure of the exact amount.
>
> This simple but very typical example gets to the heart of how decision
> making was intertwined with a company’s authority structure and
> advancement patterns. … Had they acted decisively in 1975—in
> hindsight, the only substantively rational choice—they would have
> salvaged the battery and saved their company millions of dollars in
> the long run.
>
> In the short run, however, …. they would have been taking serious
> personal risks in restoring the battery. … their political networks
> might have unraveled, leaving them vulnerable to attack. … A manager
> at Weft Corporation reflects:
>
> > People are always calculating how others will see the decisions they
> > make. … They know that they have to gauge not just the external …
> > market consequences of a decision, but the internal political
> > consequences. And sometimes you can make the right market decision,
> > but it can be the wrong political decision.

(*Mazes*, 81-84)

Had the manager in charge of the plant with the ailing battery done the
replacement, his department would be six million dollars less
profitable. When it came time to compare managers for the next
promotion, he would seem massively less efficient than the guy running
the plant next door. He’d be passed by and his corporate ascendency
would be over.

Corporate managers simply aren’t allowed to be moral, or even
reasonable. And those who try are simply weeded out. Not only does the
manager who replaced the battery get passed over for the job; the
manager who was obedient enough not to gets promoted to a more powerful
position.


The Politics of Wikis
=====================

December 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikianarchism)

* * * * *

Anarchism has a pretty bad rap. Put aside all the people who think it’s
about smashing windows and shooting presidents and just focus on the
idea (*an arch* — without rulers). If someone told you that you should
start a business where basically no one is in charge of anything and
everyone shares ownership of everything and all decisions are made by
consensus, you’d think they were a hopeless utopian about to get a large
dose of reality. Yet that’s pretty much what Wikipedia is.

There’s the obvious anarchism of wikis: namely, “anyone can edit”. No
intelligence tests or approval rules or even a temporary probation.
Anyone can just wander up and hit that edit button and get started.
Where in the world can a random person get a larger audience?

That’s pretty radical in itself, but things go much deeper. There’s no
ownership over text. If you write something, as soon as you post it to
Wikipedia, it’s no longer “yours” in any real sense. Others will modify
and mangle it without a second thought and anyone who quotes those words
in the future will attribute them to “Wikipedia” and not to you. In a
culture where directors are suing people for fastforwarding over the
smutty scenes in their movies, that’s pretty wild.

And while there are a few technical tricks to give some people more
software features than others, for the most part the Wikipedia community
is pretty flat. Every non-edit decision, from which pages get deleted to
what the logo in the corner is, gets made by consensus with everyone
getting a chance to have their say.

In real life, few people are willing to take such a radical stand. Even
the farthest reaches of the far left hold back from proposing such
extreme ideas, suggesting that not only that such extreme freedom
wouldn’t fly in a capitalist culture like ours, but that perhaps some of
these restrictions are just necessary because of human nature. But it’s
humans who edit Wikipedia, and mostly humans raised in capitalist
culture as well. Perhaps it’s time to give more extremism a chance.


Seven Habits of Highly Successful Websites
==========================================

December 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sevenhabits)

* * * * *

I got a phone call from my father the other day. “Oh,” I thought
immediately, “he’s probably calling to finally apologize for failing to
attend that basketball game I played at in fourth grade.” But no, I was
once again wrong. He was calling to pitch his web startup.

They’re at the racquetball court, the grocery store, the venture
capitalists’ offices — you can’t avoid this new crowd of so-called “Web
2.0” startups. And every time they meet you, if they’re not asking for
angel funding, they’re asking for suggestions on how they should run
their company.

For a long time, I’d simply tell them they should ask a real expert,
like Dr. Paulson Graham of the Institute of Advances Startup Studies,
but the number of queries has become so great that I’ve decided to
conduct some research of my own.

I picked out seven recent extremely popular websites. While perhaps not
having the mindshare of a “Basecamp” or a “Ning”, these websites do have
the benefit of having tons of actual users. Here they are, ranked
roughly in order of popularity:

-   MySpace
-   Wikipedia (basically tied)
-   Facebook
-   Flickr (pronounced flick-her)
-   Digg
-   Del.icio.us (pronounced dell-dot-icky-oh-dot-you-ess)
-   Google Maps (no popularity data available but I bet it’s pretty
    popular)

I looked at all these websites to see what they have in common. Here’s
what I discovered.

Be Ugly
-------

With the single exception of Flickr, all these websites are hideous.
Facebook and Wikipedia redesigned late in the game, upgrading their web
design from “hideous” to “barely tolerable”, but MySpace has continued
on, its name becoming synonymous with design so atrocious it has
actually been known to induce vomiting in epileptic Japanese children.
Not surprisingly, it’s the most popular site on the list.

Unlike most of Google, Google Maps actually isn’t such a bad looking
website in itself, but most of its Web 2.0 “cred” comes from its ability
to make “mashups” in which people stick a Google Map with several
hundred thousand different little red blurble icons sticking all over it
onto a webpage whose design sense can best be described as “MySpace
knockoff”. Normally I don’t go in for guilt by association, but in this
case I think it’s deserved.

Del.icio.us and Digg both attempted redesigns at one point but due to a
tragic mixup in communication, the web design teams they hired misheard
their instructions and thought their job was actually to try to make the
site look *worse* instead of better. Having blown several thousand
dollars of their VC’s money on this enterprise, they had no choice but
to launch the resulting look.

Don’t Have Features
-------------------

Let’s start with MySpace. Again, just as it’s a leader in traffic, it’s
a leader in this category. MySpace has so few features, I don’t even
know what it does. Neither, apparently, do its users, who in fact create
MySpace accounts simply to impress their friends and annoy their
teachers. (Personal communication)

The last time Wikipedia added a substantive new feature was the addition
of categories a couple years ago and, frankly, that was a pretty bad
idea because it was so poorly implemented. Otherwise it’s basically just
been a big box you edit text in with a bunch of kluges on top. That’s
how it got to be number two.

Facebook, Flickr, and Digg all add features occasionally, but they’re
more than counteracted by Del.icio.us and Google Maps, which in fact
have actively taken features away. Del.icio.us decided that tag
intersections (finding links that are tagged with two words) was just
too hard to get back online after they were purchased by Yahoo! and so
they simply took the feature down without notice. The site spiked in
popularity until they added them back the other day and traffic went
down once again.

Google Maps, meanwhile, has just removed everything else from the page
except for the map and the search box, ensuring no features get in
between the user and their mapping experience. Like most Google
software, though, features are definitely not going to be *added*.

Let Users Do Your Job
---------------------

None of the content on any of these sites is provided by the people who
made the site. In every case, the content is provided by the users. The
only exception is Google Maps, where the content is provided NAVTEQ.

Combined with the last principle, you might begin to suspect that this
is simply because the developers of these sites are extremely lazy. But
I don’t believe that; I think there’s a more complicated principle at
work.

I believe in a theory I’ll call “The Stupidity of Crowds”. Here’s the
basic idea: if just one person or a small group of people builds a
website, they have to be at least moderately intelligent. Buying servers
and writing programs is somewhat hard and takes a little bit of
brainpower. This means that the content for their site will be similarly
intelligent and thus it won’t be of interest to the vast majority of
Internet users.

The glorious thing about the Internet, however, is that it allows us to
aggregate the combined stupidity of literally *millions* of people. No
longer do you have to try to play towards the lowest common denominator
— now you can actually have the lowest common denominator build your
site for you. No single mortal could possibly come up with the content
you find on the average MySpace, let alone the hideous color scheme,
garish backgrounds, and awful auto-playing background music. No,
something like that takes The Stupidity of Crowds.

Ignore Standards
----------------

Like 99.999999% of all websites on the Internet, none of these websites
supports web standards, the documents that explain the proper way to use
the Web. Enough said.

Build to Flip
-------------

MySpace, Flickr, Del.icio.us, and Google Maps all sold out to larger
companies. (Google Maps didn’t even launch until after it was acquired.)
Wikipedia is apparently some sort bizarre legal construction called a
“donation-funded non-profit” and this apparently has made it hard to
sell. (Note to future founders: make sure not to incorporate your
company as one of these as it can severely hamper your options later
on.)

Facebook and Digg haven’t sold out yet, but I bet they want to. (Another
tip: taking large quantities of VC money also makes it hard to sell your
company, both because it gives you a swelled head but also because it
gives the VCs control over when you can sell, and their heads are
*really* big.)


Eight Reasons (Some) Wikis Work
===============================

December 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whywikiswork)

* * * * *

*published at [Personal Democracy
Forum](http://www.personaldemocracy.com/node/1121)*

The stunning success of Wikipedia in creating an encyclopedia from
scratch has led many to believe that they can achieve similar results.
(Want to get rich? Easy! Just install the MediaWiki software, title it
“how to get rich”, and wait for the answers to start flowing in.)

Clearly the wiki approach does not solve every problem. So what made
Wikipedia work so well? We can’t say for certain, but by looking at
similar sites that haven’t taken off — as well as those that have (like
[TV IV](http://www.tviv.org/)) — we can spot some patterns.

1.  **Clear goal.** Wikipedia is an encyclopedia. It’s an understandable
    task with a clear end result. When you want to know something, you
    know whether it’s the kind of thing that might be in Wikipedia or
    not. And when you want to contribute, you know what kinds of things
    to add. By contrast simply adding a wiki to your existing website
    has no clear purpose.

2.  **Worth doing.** Collecting the sum of human knowledge in one place
    is just the kind of grand goal that inspires their people to sink
    their time into a big, collective effort. There are people on
    Wikipedia who spend their time going down long lists of
    computer-generated format and style errors, fixing each one by hand.
    It’s hard to imagine people putting the same amount of effort into
    cleaning up a wiki about the greatness of Tide laundry detergent.
    But people are willing to do it for something only a few people care
    a lot about (like a very specialized technical topic) or something a
    lot of people care a little about (like a piece of popular culture).

3.  **Objective standards.** It’s pretty clear what an encyclopedia
    article should be. It needs to contain an explanation of what it is
    and why it’s important, the history, the uses (or actions),
    criticism, and pointers to more information. And the whole thing
    needs to be written in a plain, dry style. The result is that it’s
    pretty clear what needs to be done, which means everyone can work
    together to do it. Contrast this with a novel, where the book’s
    success depends on the author’s creativity and, well, novelty.

4.  **Made from small pieces.** Encyclopedias are huge projects, but
    they’re made up of manageably-sized articles. If an article ever
    grows too long, it can be split into parts (*see* [Al Gore
    Controversies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al_Gore_controversies)).
    When a page is small enough that the whole thing can fit comfortably
    in your head, it’s much easier to work with: you can write it in one
    sitting, you can read it relatively quickly, and you can remember
    the whole thing. Contrast this with books, which are so big that
    working seriously on them requires special dedication.

5.  **Each piece is useful.** Each article in an encyclopedia is useful
    in its own right. Even if Wikipedia had just started and all it had
    was an article about the Striped Burrowing Tree Frog, that page
    would still be useful, just like every other page on the Internet
    about an obscure topic. The page, if it was good enough, would show
    up on the right Google searches and more Tree Frog fans would begin
    contributing to it. And if that page worked well, it could easily
    lead to others. Contrast this with a dictionary, which you’re
    probably only going to use if it has a high percentage of the words
    you want to look up.

6.  **Segmented subjects.** Few people are passionate about learning all
    human knowledge. But many more people are passionate about some
    subset of that. Encyclopedias allow the people who really care about
    French social theorists to spend all their time on that, without
    ever caring about the rest of the site. And the same is true of
    readers. The result is that lots of different people can work on
    lots of different parts, with the whole project getting done as a
    result, even though nobody worked on that explicitly. Contrast this
    with coming up with a theory, where the work requires understanding
    all the data and thinking about it as a whole.

7.  **Personally useful.** The best way to understand something is to
    write about it and the best thing to write is a layman’s
    explanation. An encyclopedia provides a opportunity to do just that.
    At the same time, it captures what you’ve learned in case you forget
    it later and gives the concept more form so that you’re more likely
    to remember. By contrast, writing guides for children doesn’t teach
    you much.

8.  **Enjoyable work.** An encyclopedia mostly consists of people trying
    to explain things and explaining things can be quite fun. At
    parties, if you as someone about the problem they’ve dedicated their
    life to, they’ll gladly talk your ear off about it for hours.
    Wikipedia capitalizes on this tendency while also magnifying it —
    now it’s not just one partygoer, it’s the whole world listening.
    Contrast this with a project like categorizing all the pages on the
    Internet, which most people would find quite boring.

I came up with these principles just by thinking about why I use
Wikipedia and not about specific examples of people who have violated
them. So it’s a little surprising that it turns out to mostly be a list
of wiki sites that haven’t exactly taken off: SourceWatch fails 1,
vanity projects fail 2, Wikitorial failed 3, Wikibooks fails 4,
Wiktionary fails 5, the over-specialized sites fail 6, Wikijunior fails
7, and Wikispecies fails 8 (at least as far as I’m concerned).

Of course, even if you get all these things right, that says nothing
about whether your site will succeed. Success requires more than just a
good idea, it requires doing the hard work of actually making things
happen. But that’s a topic for another article.


The Politics of Wikipedians
===========================

December 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikimao)

* * * * *

A film director named Jaron Lanier recently published [an essay titled
“Digital
Maoism”](http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/lanier06/lanier06_index.html).
The essay is a dreadful mishmash of name-calling, whining, and downright
incoherence, but insofar as Lanier has a point, it is this: people often
attribute facts and claims to “Wikipedia”, as if it was some giant hive
mind that combined all our individual thoughts into one group opinion.
But, in reality, Wikipedia is simply written by people, people with
individual voices and ideas. And technology is making us lose sight of
that.

(I maybe doing Lanier too great a service by attributing such a coherent
view to him as nothing quite so clear is ever actually expressed in the
article. Nonetheless, I will continue as if this is Lanier’s view.)

It is an interesting point, but what Lanier finds so frightening is
precisely what I find so exciting about these technologies. I still
remember the light bulb that went off in my head when my friend Dan
Connolly answered a question by saying “According to Google, X is the
case.” “Google” had said no such thing, of course, but the Google
algorithm had processed all the links on the Web and send Dan the page
it thought most relevant to his query. It was this particular page that
said X, of course, but the notion that Google itself was answering
questions in this way was a revelation.

The same is true of Wikipedia. There are individual people, obviously,
but what makes Wikipedia so fascinating are the technical and social
processes that combine their work, turning it into something no
individual person is responsible for or would necessarily endorse.

I often find myself wondering what Wikipedia would say about
such-and-such a subject or how important Wikipedia thinks something else
is. I refuse to edit my Wikipedia page, not only because it’s bad form,
but because I’m genuinely curious about how Wikipedia sees me. It’s an
odd thing, to think a site that anyone can edit actually has opinions or
concerns or a point of view on the world, but it does, and it’s a
fascinating one.


The Goog Life: how Google keeps employees by treating them like kids
====================================================================

December 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googlife)

* * * * *

I was talking with a friend the other day about that perennial subject
of conversation in the Valley, Google. And finally she gave me the clue
that made the whole place make sense. “It’s about infantilizing people,”
she explained. “Give them free food, do their laundry, let them sit on
bouncy brightly-colored balls. Do everything so that they never have to
grow up and learn how to live life on their own.”

And when you look at it that way, everything Google does makes a sick
sort of sense.

Not a whole lot has changed since the last time I visited Google. The
campus is bigger — the buildings across the street, instead of being
reserved for lawyers and other lowlifes, are now being used by the
engineering staff as well, to keep up with Google’s nonstop growth. And
the employees seem a little less excited about things than the last time
I was there. Nobody says “We’re on a mission to change the world!”
anymore. Now they say, “Yeah, I’m just going to stick around here
another six months until my options vest.” and “I kind of want to
transfer out of my group but I worry that all the other groups are
worse.”

But the two blatant changes to the campus are a large, terribly
fake-looking replica of SpaceShipOne hanging in the middle of the main
building and a replica dinosaur skeleton standing outside. “It’s as if
this place is being decorated by seven-year-olds,” a friend comments. It
also reminds me of Robert Reich’s comment about Newt Gingrich: “His
office is adorned with figurines of dinosaurs, as you might find in the
bedrooms of little boys who dream of one day being huge and powerful.”

The dinosaurs and spaceships certainly fit in with the infantilizing
theme, as does the hot tub-sized ball pit that Googlers can jump into
and throw ball fights. Everyone I know who works there either acts
childish (the army of programmers), enthusiastically adolescent (their
managers and overseers), or else is deeply cynical (the hot-shot
programmers). But as much as they may want to leave Google, the
infantilizing tactics have worked: they’re afraid they wouldn’t be able
to survive anywhere else.

Google hires programmers straight out of college and tempts them with
all the benefits of college life. Indeed, as the hiring brochures
stress, the place was explicitly modeled upon college. At one point, I
wondered why Google didn’t just go all the way and build their own
dormitories. After all, weren’t the late-night dorm-room conversations
with others who were smart like you one of the best parts of college
life? But as the gleam wears off the Google, I can see why it’s no place
anyone would want to hang around for that long. Even the suburban desert
of Mountain View is better.

Google’s famed secrecy doesn’t really do a very good job of keeping
information from competitors. Those who are truly curious can pick up
enough leaks and read enough articles to figure out how mostly
everything works. But what it does do is create an aura of impossibility
around the place. People read the airbrushed versions of Google
technologies in talks and academic papers and think that Google has some
amazingly large computer lab with amazingly powerful technology. But
hang around a Googler long enough and you’ll hear them complain about
the unreliability of GFS and how they don’t really have enough computers
to keep up with the load.

“It’s always frightening when you see how the sausage actually gets
made,” explains a product manager. And that’s exactly what the secrecy
is supposed to prevent. The rest of the world sees Google as this
impenetrable edifice with all the mysteries of the world inside (“I hear
once you’ve worked there for 256 days they teach you the secret
levitation,” [explains xkcd](http://xkcd.com/c192.html)) while the
select few inside the walls know the truth — there is no there there —
and are bound together by this burden.

Such a strategy may have worked in the early days, when Googlers were a
select and special few, but as the company grows larger and employee’s
identification with it grows thinner, Google has to step up their
efforts to acculturate. And that’s where the life-size dinosaur replicas
come in. Enjoy being huge and powerful while you can. Because, like the
dinosaurs, this too will pass.


Think Bigger: A Generalist Manifesto
====================================

December 14, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbigger)

* * * * *

Our world is full of forces pushing us towards specificity. Open a
newspaper and it’s divided into topic sections. Go to the bookstore and
it’s divided into subject categories. Go to school and the classes are
all in separate fields. Get a degree and you have to study in a
particular major. Get a job and you have to work at a particular task.

The world needs specificists, of course, but it also needs generalists.
And we see precious few of those. It’s not hard to see why: try to do
something big and everyone will try to talk you out of it.

“That’s impossible,” they’ll say. “Do that and you’ll only drive
yourself crazy.”

“If that worked, don’t you think someone else would have done it?”

“With all due respect, what makes you the expert on that subject?”

Tell someone you’re working on a dissertation about the mating dance of
the East African dung beetle and they won’t bat an eye. It would be the
height of impoliteness to ask “Is that really worth spending three years
on?” — even if that’s exactly what you’re thinking. But set your sights
a little bit higher and people have no problem knocking you down. “Come
on,” they’ll say, furrowing their brow, “do you really think you’re
going to be able to pull something like that off?”

Don’t listen to them. People are afraid of grandeur; it challenges the
status quo. But you shouldn’t be. “Look up more” should be your motto;
“Think bigger” your mantra.

The first step is to recognize your place in things. If you study beetle
mating habits, look at the larger mating patterns your studies fall
into, look at the big picture of animal behavior, ask where you fit in
the bigger question of what it means for an animal to behave. This is
what I mean by “Look up more.”

But if you do this—and I believe you will—then you’ll find it hard to
stay satisfied with your dung beetle project. You’ll start wondering if
you could move on to bigger things. Perhaps just a little bit bigger at
first—analyzing a few more types, discussing a few more implications—but
soon you’ll notice that others have left the field wide open for the
truly big picture stuff and you’ll start wondering why it’s not there
that you should stake your claim. This is what I mean by “Think bigger.”

Sure, at first it’ll be frightening biting off more than you’ve ever had
to chew. But the fear will soon give way to exhilaration and the extra
work involved will be paid for in the additional notoriety, in the joy
of knowing that you’ve made a real difference. After all, do you really
want to spend the rest of your life studying dung beetles?


Tips for Better Thinking
========================

December 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbetter)

* * * * *

Go to the library and you’ll find whole bookcases full of books on how
to write better. But look for a book on how to *think* better and you’ll
be busy for a while. (The only major book I could find — *Crimes Against
Logic* — was a dreadful little series of basic logical fallacies dressed
up in political polemic.)

It can’t be that writing is more important than thinking. While I’ve met
many people who can’t exactly write, it seems that just about everyone
has to think — even writers. Nor do I think it’s that the task is really
harder. We know very little about the internal process of writing, so
writing guides consist mostly of good and bad examples, along with some
general rules. Surely one could do the same for thought.

Perhaps the answer is that there isn’t such a thing as good thinking.
But the case for it seems even stronger than the case for good writing.
Good thinking is that which better helps us approximate reality —
avoiding fallacies, missteps of judgment, faulty assumptions,
misunderstandings, and needless fillips and loops.

And yet the subject’s plain importance, I can find scarcely an article
that takes up the topic. Where is the piece that savages bad thinking
the way [Mark Twain savaged Fenimore Cooper’s aimless
writing](http://www.pbs.org/marktwain/learnmore/writings_fenimore.html)
or the way [Orwell went after political abuses of
English](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/politics/english/e_polit)
or, for more modern readers, [Matt Taibbi’s dissection of Thomas
Friedman’s latest
book](http://www.alternet.org/columnists/story/21856/)? It seems like it
would be just as fun — if not more — to watch a gifted writer slice and
dice up a convoluted thought until it becomes apparent that it’s
actually meaningless.

The closest I can think of is [Chomsky’s review of B.F.
Skinner](http://www.chomsky.info/articles/19711230.htm) (an unfair
match-up if there ever was one — a bit like using a blow torch to clear
off a dust mite). But Chomsky’s attacking Skinner’s ideas rather
specifically (and, more generally, exposing the political implications
behind bogus science); the essay is certainly not one in a series of
examples of how to think better.

As one gets more skilled, the opportunities for improvement become less
available — apparently because fewer people are interested in improving.
The library gives free courses in how to read better, but these are for
people who have trouble reading long books, not for those who already
can but want to continue to improve. And there are courses in improving
your writing, but they generally only get you from awful to serviceable,
and not from serviceable to great. The same seems true of thinking —
there are many books on fairly blatant logical fallacies to avoid, but
few on more subtle improvements to thought.

And yet, at least with writing, people try. There are English courses in
schools, [taught by some of the greatest writers of the
generation](http://english.syr.edu/cwp/saunders.htm). And journalists
can semi-apprentice themselves by freelancing before great editors, who
slice and dice their prose until it shines. Yet I’ve never seen a class
or an apprenticeship in thinking, except perhaps incidentally.

The reason, I think, is because no one is [thinking
bigger](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbigger). But that means
there’s plenty of opportunity. The field’s wide open, folks.


The Grim Meathook Future
========================

December 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thegmh)

* * * * *

In the technology industry we have a phrase. We call it the “grim
meathook future”, after [a brilliant piece by Joshua
Ellis](http://www.zenarchery.com/index.php?p=962):

> I think the problem is that the future, maybe for the first time since
> WWII, lies on the far side of an event horizon for us, *because* there
> are so many futures possible. There’s the wetware future, the hardware
> future, the transhumanist future, the post-rationalist (aka
> fundamentalist) future.
>
> And then there’s the future where everything just sort of keeps going
> on the way it has, with incremental changes, and technology is no
> longer the deciding factor in things. You don’t need high tech to
> change the world; you need Semtex and guns that were designed by a
> Russian soldier fifty-odd years ago.
>
> Meanwhile, most of the people with any genuine opportunity or ability
> to effect global change are too busy patting each other on the back at
> conventions and blue-skying goofy social networking tools that are
> essentially useless to 95% of the world’s population, who live within
> fifteen feet of everyone they’ve ever known and have no need to track
> their fuck buddies with GPS systems. (This, by the way, includes most
> Americans, quite honestly.)
>
> You can’t blame them for this, because it’s fun and it’s a great way
> to travel and get paid, but it doesn’t actually help solve any real
> problems, except the problem of media theory grad students, which the
> rest of the world isn’t really interested in solving.
>
> Feeding poor people is useful tech, but it’s not very sexy and it
> won’t get you on the cover of *Wired*. Talk about it too much and you
> sound like an earnest hippie. So nobody wants to do that.
>
> They want to make cell phones that can scan your personal measurements
> and send them real-time to potential sex partners. Because, you know,
> the fucking Japanese teenagers love it, and Japanese teenagers are
> clearly the smartest people on the planet.
>
> The upshot of all of this is that the Future gets divided; the cute,
> insulated future that Joi Ito and Cory Doctorow and you and I inhabit,
> and the **grim meathook future** that most of the world is facing, in
> which they watch their squats and under-developed fields get turned
> into a giant game of Counterstrike between crazy faith-ridden jihadist
> motherfuckers and crazy faith-ridden American redneck motherfuckers,
> each doing their best to turn the entire world into one type of
> fascist nightmare or another.
>
> Of course, nobody really wants to talk about that future, because it’s
> depressing and not fun and doesn’t have Fischerspooner doing the
> soundtrack. So everybody pretends they don’t know what the future
> holds, when the unfortunate fact is that — unless we start paying very
> serious attention — it holds what the past holds: a great deal of
> extreme boredom punctuated by occasional horror and the odd moment of
> grace.


Drugs and Guns
==============

December 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/drugsandguns)

* * * * *

In movies, it’s clear when the camera is drunk: blurred vision, shaky
motions, everything becoming slightly less clear. It’s similarly obvious
when the camera is on acid: rainbow colors, things melting into each
other, and a sort of dazed gaze. Yet, despite the prevalence of pot,
I’ve never seen a film or TV show where the camera is high on marijuana.

Perhaps that’s because there’s nothing to show. Some deep breaths, a
slight tingling sensation, and then an odd feeling as if something is
pressing on part of your brain, lifting your head up, making you happy.
An odd happiness, to be sure, but a happiness nonetheless. Friends are
unable to distinguish between when I’ve just gone skinnydipping and when
I’m simply high. It’s hard to show a camera being happy.

Contrast this with Omega-3 fatty acids, the fish oil acids that various
new studies are supposed to show have all sorts of positive effects for
your brain. When I swallowed a stack of Omega-3 pills, I felt as if I
was crawling up into my head, living in there instead of plotting the
next moves for my body. It made it pretty hard to get anything done.

In San Francisco, medical marijuana is perfectly legal and health-food
culture makes Omega-3 practically mandatory, but possessing a gun is
actually outlawed within city limits (even for off-duty cops). To
actually discharge one you have to drive south of the border, where
shooting ranges allow deprived northerners to partake of this
recreational craze.

Unlike the flowing, hippie vibe of drug culture, gun culture is strictly
utilitarian: concrete walls, florescent lights, drab carpeting.
Tough-looking guys take your license and hand you a gun. First-timers go
into the training room for a quick primer on how to use it, then you
take your weapon, ammo, and target into the shooting range.

Most of the targets are pretty bland — vague silhouettes or bullseyes —
but there was one frightening option that featured a blatantly
stereotypical illustration of a hooded bad guy character holding a gun
to a cute young girl’s head. Normally descriptions of such pictures are
more evocative than the pictures themselves, but this drawing was just
about perfect.

Naturally, this was the target our neighbors on the shooting range had
chosen and were now shooting at with enormous shotguns whose blasts
shook the entire room. Meanwhile, I had a small handgun with a little
bit of a kick and a simple silhouette.

My gun jammed the first couple of times I tried to shoot; I had to go
through the process of unloading and reloading it several times before I
even shot a single bullet. It’s amazing how comically fake the actual
gun feels when you do this — it makes all the noises and motions you’d
expect from a gun, but it seems to lack any internal mechanisms for
doing the actual shooting, like a prop for a movie.

When I finally did manage to get the gun working, I relaxed, aimed my
weapon, and took ten shots at where I thought the bullseye was. (My
long-distance eyesight is really terrible and I hadn’t thought to bring
my glasses until now, so I gave it my best shot.) I shot again and
again, the pattern of kicking and aiming becoming almost rhythmic. When
the gun was finally empty, I pushed the little button to whirr my target
back to me. To my amazement, nearly all ten bullets had gone in right by
the bullseye. My partner looked frightened.

What’s odd about shooting is how, well, relaxing it is. Something about
the furious action of the gun seems to drain you of all your nervous
energy. And while, if you think about it, the item you’re holding is a
weapon of terrible destruction, there’s very little visual evidence of
that fact. Just as the gun feels like a prop, the whole thing feels like
a game: aim, press the trigger, and some dots appear in a piece of
paper. But when you’re done you don’t feel hyped-up like after a video
game. Instead you feel as if what you actually discharged was your
nervous energy.

We rolled up the bullet-ridden silhouette to take home as a souvenir.
“Maybe I’ll mail this to my mom,” I said. “I don’t think that’s a very
good idea,” came the reply.


Medium Stupid
=============

December 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mediumstupid)

* * * * *

In July 1, 2004, Paul Krugman gave a talk about the state of the
American economy. After the significant 2001 recession, the economy had
begun growing again, with increasing growth in America’s economic
output, or GDP. But, unlike the growth in the Clinton years, the extra
money being made in America wasn’t going to the average person. Instead,
as the economy grew, the wages for the average person stagnated or even
declined. All the extra money was going to the people at the very top.

In the press, President Bush’s supporters complained that the public
wasn’t more happy about the growing economy Bush had given them. After
all, he’d pulled the country out of a recession; normally that’s good
for a boost in the polls. Sadly, Americans were just too dumb to notice,
Bush’s supporters concluded. If only they paid more attention to the
news. But what these people “are really urging,” Krugman explained in
his talk, “is not that the public should be smart, but that the public
should be medium
stupid.”[†](http://www.americanprogress.org/kf/krugman-final.pdf)

If the public was really “stupid” (i.e. uneducated), it wouldn’t watch
the news at all. Instead, it would notice it was out of work,
poorly-paid, or otherwise having trouble making ends meet, and conclude
that the economy wasn’t doing very well. On the other hand, if the
public was really smart, it’d dig deep into the numbers to find that —
surprise, surprise! — for most people, the economy wasn’t doing as well
as the headline numbers about GDP growth would suggest. The only way for
the public to buy the Bush administration spin is to be medium stupid.

The medium stupid idea has much wider applicability. Most specifically,
it explains the general state that the mainstream media tries to
inculcate in the public. The uneducated American has a general idea that
invading other countries is probably a bad idea. The overeducated
American can point to dozens of examples of why this is going to be a
bad idea. But the “medium stupid” American, the kind that gullibly reads
the *New York Times* and watches the *CBS Evening News*, is convinced
that Iraq is full of weapons of mass destruction that could blow our
country to bits at any minute. A little education can be a dangerous
thing.

(Along these lines, at one point I was working on a documentary film
about the evening news that would demonstrate this point. The title,
*Medium Stupid*, would also be a convenient homage to *Medium Cool*.)

The same is true in school. As Christopher Hayes points out in his
genius article, [Is A Little Economics A Dangerous
Thing?](http://www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/2897/), the
uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a pretty good
idea — after all, people deserve to be paid more than \$5 an hour. And
the overeducated American feels the same way; like the dozens of
Economics Prize winners who signed a petition to raise the minimum wage,
they’ve seen the studies showing that raising the minimum wage has only
a negligible effect on employment. But those who have only had Economics
101 buy the propaganda that government interference in the market will
only make things worse. And, [as Hayes
shows](http://www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/2897/), this leads
to bad decisions in many areas — the minimum wage being only one
prominent example.

The medium stupid idea has applicability in other areas of life. The
uncultured person who knows nothing about fashion doesn’t mind wandering
around in jeans and a t-shirt. And the overcultured person knows exactly
what to wear to be hip. But medium stupid ol’ me looks bad and feels bad
about it.

To work, propaganda, be it from the Bush administration or the fashion
industry, requires you to be medium stupid. Know too little and you
never hear the falsehoods. Know too much and you can spot it for a
fraud. Which side of the line do you want to be on?


Museums and Exploratoriums
==========================

December 21, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfulmuseums)

* * * * *

The San Francisco Exploratorium is widely regarded as one of the finest
hands-on museums in the world. There are spinoffs in the San Francisco
airport and [a Klutz book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1878257145). Like
Richard Feynman, the museum has become something of a touchstone of
rightness for the science-minded community.

The Exploratorium is no doubt a fine museum, as far as such things go,
but like all museums, it is deeply flawed. Like most media of American
education, museums are hugely ineffective edifices.

The museum presents a golden opportunity to teach. You have a crowd that
is explicitly seeking out knowledge, coming to you in person, giving you
a large chunk of their time, and accompanied by their friends and
family. It is hard to imagine a more ideal setting for education. And
yet, this golden chance is squandered by boring exhibit designs.

Many museums simply present nominally educational things, like pieces of
art or natural specimens of science, with a couple sentences of
explanation. It is not clear what one is actually supposed to learn from
this and in practice the answer seems to be: not much.

Science museums take things another step by showing actual examples of
physical principles, and the Exploratorium goes a step further by
letting the kids control them. But in my experience although there were
many interesting principles on display, there was little learning. Each
exhibit has been regarded as a little toy, to be pushed and prodded
until you get bored and move on to something else.

It’s not the visitor’s fault: the exhibit makes the principle at work
less than clear and even if someone was interested in reading the
accompanying text, it rarely says much more than the name of the
phenomenon; no actual explanation is provided.

Museums have infuriated me on this front since I visited them as a
little kid. I remember drawing up plans for a genuinely educational
museum, and although I was extremely young at the time, the general
principles still seem sound: split people up into groups, have them try
to solve real problems, encourage them to sit and engage with something
over time instead of flitting from exhibit to exhibit, make it just as
rewarding for adults as well as kids. (My more specific ideas from that
period, involving floating chairs going down rear-projection tunnels,
seem a little sillier.)

But even in the multi-exhibit model used by the Exploratorium there is
much that could be improved. The exhibits could use what Tufte calls
“small multiples” to give kids a physical intuition about a phenomenon
by letting them change the relevant variables, rather than just showing
them one case. The descriptions could give the force vectors and
equations for each examples instead of just the name. Some of it might
go over kids heads, but even just getting them accustomed to such things
is a valuable skill.

Museums, [like lectures](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfullectures),
seem to be one of those things that are simply taken for granted as a
necessary part of being cultured. Cities have to have them, citizens
have to visit them. Everybody involved feels virtuous about the
enterprise and nobody ever asks if anything is being learned.


Cliche Finder
=============

December 22, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/clichefinder)

* * * * *

It’s not an essay, but I hope I can count it as a blog post. Here’s a
new hack I made for my friend Quinn:

[Cliche Finder](http://cliche.theinfo.org/)


Sociology or Anthropology
=========================

December 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/socvanthro)

* * * * *

Sometimes people ask me what the difference is between sociology and
anthropology. There are the surface ones, of course — sociology
typically studies first-world societies, whereas anthropology has a rep
for studying so-called “primitive” cultures. But the fundamental
difference is a philosophical one: sociologists study society, while
anthropologists study culture.

What’s the difference? Let’s do a case study. It’s easy to notice a
subtle sort of sexism in American textbooks. For example, studies have
found that in biology textbooks sperm are seen as competitive creatures
while eggs are passive receptacles they aim to penetrate. But the actual
science on the subject is much less clear: eggs seem to do a fair bit of
selection themselves, etc.

I saw a paper by an anthropologist on this fact; their argument was that
these textbooks were a result of the sexism of American culture, a
culture which sees men as competing for access to women, and those
notions are naturally transported onto our writing about conception.
Sexist culture, sexist output.

A sociologist would dig a little deeper. They’d see who writes the
textbooks, perhaps notice a disproportionate number of males. They’d
look into why it was that males got these jobs, find the sexism inherent
in the relevant institutions. They’d argue it was the structures of
society that end up with sexist textbooks, not some magical force known
as “American culture”.

As you might guess, I’m on the side of the sociologists. Blaming things
on culture — as if it were a natural property of a group of people or a
mystical life force with its own mind — seems too facile. It also seems
wrong.

I’ve mostly been talking about the cultural anthropologists, but there
are also a subset of racist anthropologists (sometimes called
“anthropological science,” in accordance with [Wall’s
Law](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/psuedoscientism)). These
anthropologists tried to measure different properties of people, see if
they could quantify the differences between the races and predict
criminality from the shape of the head.

Cultural anthropologists disdain all that and prefer to endorse a very
left-wing notion of cultural relativism. (One shouldn’t make judgments
about other cultures!) But in doing so, they end up pushing the
judgments off onto the peoples involved. Just like the racist
anthropologists, they end up suggesting that the reason people over here
believe act differently from the people over there is because they’re
different people.

But if there’s one thing we’ve learned from psychology, it’s that — for
the most part — people are people, wherever you go. As Zimbardo’s
Stanford Prison Experiment showed, put normal people into the wrong
situation and they turn into devious enforcement machines. And put the
same people into a different society and they’ll change just as fast.

It isn’t culture — whatever that is — that causes these things; it’s
institutions. Institutions create environments which force a course of
action. And that’s why I’m a sociologist.

*Bonus recommendation:* I’ve been watching *The Wire* lately; perhaps
the most sociologically-inclined show on television. And that’s what
makes it interesting, unlike all the other good-evil cop dramas.


The Journalist’s Creed
======================

December 24, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/didion)

* * * * *

> I am not sure what more I could tell you about these pieces. I could
> tell you that I liked doing some of them more than others, but that
> all of them were hard for me to do, and took more time than perhaps
> they were worth; that there is always a point in the writing of a
> piece when I sit in a room literally papered with false starts and
> cannot put one word after another and imagine that I have suffered a
> small stroke, leaving me apparently undamaged but actually aphasic. I
> was in fact as sick as I had ever been when I was writing “Slouching
> Towards Bethlehem”; the pain kept me awake at night and so for twenty
> and twenty-one hours a day I drank gin-and-hot-water to blunt the pain
> and took Dexedrine to blunt the gin and wrote the piece. (I would like
> you to believe that I kept working out of some real professionalism,
> to meet the deadline, but that would not be entirely true; I did have
> a deadline, but it was also a troubled time, and working did to the
> trouble what gin did to the pain.) What else is there to tell? I am
> bad at interviewing people. I avoid situations in which I have to talk
> to anyone’s press agent. (This precludes doing pieces on most actors,
> a bonus in itself.) I do not like to make telephone calls, and would
> not like to count the mornings I have sat on some Best Western motel
> bed somewhere and tried to force myself to put through the call to the
> assistant district attorney. My only advantage as a reporter is that I
> am so physically small, so temperamentally unobtrusive, and so
> neurotically inarticulate that people tend to forget that my presence
> runs counter to their best interests. And it always does. That is one
> last thing to remember: *writers are always selling somebody out.*

(Joan Didion, *Slouching Towards Bethlehem*, xv-xvi)

> In fact I have abandoned altogether that kind of pointless entry;
> instead I tell what some would call lies. “That’s simply not true,”
> the members of my family frequently tell me when they come up against
> my memory of a shared event. “The party was *not* for you, the spider
> was *not* a black widow, *it wasn’t that way at all*.” Very likely
> they are right, for not only have I always had trouble distinguishing
> between what happened and what merely might have happened, but I
> remain unconvinced that the distinction, for my purposes, matters. The
> cracked crab that I recall having for lunch the day my father came
> home from Detroit in 1945 must certainly be embroidery, worked into
> the day’s pattern to lend verisimilitude; I was ten years old and
> would not now remember the cracked crab. The day’s events did not turn
> on cracked crab. And yet it is precisely that fictitious crab that
> makes me see the afternoon all over again, a home movie run all too
> often, the father bearing gifts, the child weeping, an exercise in
> family love and guilt. Or that is what it was to me. Similarly,
> perhaps it never did snow that August in Vermont; perhaps there never
> were flurries in the night wind and maybe no one else felt the ground
> hardening and summer already dead even as we pretended to bask in it,
> but that was how it felt to me, and it might as well have snowed,
> could have snowed, did snow.

(*Slouching*, 134)


Cultural Imperialism Sucks: a visit to Berlin
=============================================

December 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cultimp)

* * * * *

After I exited the plane, it took me several minutes before I realized I
was in Germany. After all, the airport was designed with the same basic
concepts, the people all looked fairly normal, and all the
advertisements were all identical to their counterparts in the US.

Once we left the airport and begun wandering around Berlin, things
didn’t get much better. There was a Dunkin’ Donuts and a Burger King, a
Pizza Hut and a T-Mobile store (called T-Punkt in some weird homage to
Ashton Kutcher), ads for Coca-Cola and even a The Body Shop. (A major
shopping mall was run by Sony; just like in old SF.) The streets looked
roughly similar, the cars had the same manufacturers, the buildings had
the same basic styles.

The similarity plays tricks on you. It not only took me a while to
realize I was in Germany, it was a while before I realized this was the
former home of the Nazis. (I was trying to think where I’d heard of the
Reichstag before…) When I exclaimed my discovery, apparently the older
people on the bus turned to look at me. One wonders how much of their
fitting in is an attempt to forget their different past.

There were still differences, of course. In America, if someone knocked
you out and took you on a plane to some random city in the country, you
probably wouldn’t notice except for the fact that the street signs might
have changed color. Aside from that tiny bit of individuality, cities in
America are almost literally indistinguishable, down to the streets and
landscaping. Germany isn’t that bad.

The most obvious is that they get to keep speaking their quirky little
language, although only speaking English here gets you pretty far. On
the other hand, their currency—and presumably their government—has been
integrated into the EU. But the biggest thing you notice is that the
city is simply more elegant. The cars are smaller, the public transit
far superior, and the font on the street signs to die for. But if london
had EU currency, I’m not sure it’d be all that distinguishable.

There is a blatant taste for modernist architecture. (This is the land
of the Bauhaus, I suppose.) Just about every building I’ve been to has
been done up in styles that would be considered high culture in America.
Including our hotel room, where you can see into the top half of the
shower from the bed and a door swings between the shower and the toilet,
so that you can only use one with any privacy at once.

Despite the usual guidebook platitudes, Berlin does not feel like a
particularly vibrant city. Abandoned construction sites are everywhere,
with large quantities of supplies just laying by the street, and
graffiti coats most public surfaces, not enough to demand a repainting,
but enough to make it everpresent. All the stores have signs announcing
that new, shorter hours will begin starting next year. I overhear
complaints about 18% unemployment.

With an overseas like this, one wonders why Americans make such a fuss
about going overseas. One can apparently visit Europe with about as much
culture shock as visiting LA: a few different local chains, a different
public transit system, a new accent to learn, and, of course, a new set
of street signs. A convenience for the business traveler, perhaps. A
vast emptiness for everyone else.


Wither the Two Cultures?
========================

December 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/twocultures)

* * * * *

Nearly fifty years ago C. P. Snow delivered his famous “Two Cultures”
lecture, deploring the state of affairs in which the humanities,
especially those who believed in constructionism, had intellectually
diverged from the sciences. Scientists didn’t care about Shakespeare;
while literists bragged about not knowing any math.

But pick up a modern popular novel and it’s hard to see this criticism
holding much weight. All the literary outlets have been touting Thomas
Pynchon’s new tome, *Against the Day*. Pynchon’s novels, as eminent
literist Scott McLemee put it, discuss “the domains of information
theory, mathematical physics, cosmology” with frequent references to
such subjects as “William Hamilton’s quaternions or Georg Riemann’s zeta
function” in which the Michelson-Morley experiment takes center stage.

It’s hard to imagine anything but a new Richard Feynman book could do
more to warm a scientist’s heart.

Meanwhile, take Jonathan Franzen’s bestseller, *The Corrections* (even
an Oprah’s book club pick!). The book, which revolves around the dot-com
economic upturn, not only features frequent and detailed references to
eigenvector-based computer algorithms, advances in neurological
technology, and odd properties of electrophoresis, but even features a
main character who goes from being in that most constructivist of
professions — left-wing literary criticism — to a job building dot-com
websites.

It seems geekiness has gone mainstream. And along with it, the geeky
culture of scientism now buts up against the aesthete culture of
literism. It’s hard to see how anyone can take the two cultures
complaints seriously anymore.


Welcome to the Panopticon
=========================

December 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ccccon)

* * * * *

“Your picture is going to be on the front door of Wired News,” Quinn
told me. “That’s almost like being a journalist,” I replied. “No,” she
explained. “The thing about being a journalist is that it’s never about
you. You’re like the person sitting next to the journalist.” “Funny
that,” I replied, “because that’s exactly what I am.”

> This year’s Chaos Communication Congress opens with a unique
> opportunity — your chance to track the movements of a Wired News’
> reporter on the scene, as well as nearly a thousand other visitors to
> the annual hacker convention.
>
> […]
>
> track Quinn Norton (ID 254135) and Wired Digital’s Aaron Swartz (ID
> 254260), two of nearly 1,000 participants wearing RFID trackers for
> the duration of the congress.

(Quinn Norton, [Hacker Con Submits to
Spychips](http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,72364-0.html), *Wired
News*, December 28, 2006)

“It’s funny,” I noted. “The first time my employers find out where I am
this week may be when they report it on their own news site.”


Causes of Conformance
=====================

December 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/conformancing)

* * * * *

Institutions require people to do their bidding. A tobacco company must
find people willing to get kids addicted to cigarettes, a school must
find teachers willing to repeat the same things that they were taught, a
government must find public servants willing to enforce the law.

Part of this is simply necessity. To survive, people need money; to get
money, people need a job; to get a job, people need to find an existing
institution. But the people in these positions don’t usually see
themselves as mercenaries, doing the smallest amount to avoid getting
fired while retaining their own value system. Instead, they adopt the
value system of the institution, pushing it even when it’s not necessary
for their own survival. What explains this pattern of conformance?

The most common explanation is an active process of beating people in:
politicians get paid campaign contributions (legalized bribes) to meet
the needs of the wealthy, employees get bonuses and penalties for
meeting the needs of their employers, kids get threatened with time-outs
and bad grades if they don’t follow the demands of their teachers. In
each case, the people are forced through a series of carrots and sticks
to learn the values of the people in charge.

This is a fairly blatant form of conformance, but I suspect it’s by far
the least effective. Studies on punishment and rewards show that dealing
them out lessens the victim’s identification with the enforcer. Hitting
me every time I don’t do my job right may teach me how to do my job, but
it’s not going to make me particularly excited about it.

Indeed, punishments and rewards interfere with a much more significant
effect: cognitive dissonance. Cognitive dissonance studies have found
that simply by getting you to do something, you can be persuaded to
agree with it. In a classic study, students asked to write an essay in
favor of a certain position were found to agree more with the position
than students who could write for either position. Similarly, people who
pay more to eat a certain food claim to like it more than people who pay
less.

The basic theory is that people work to lessen the disagreement between
their beliefs and their actions and in most cases it’s simply easier to
change your beliefs. Quitting your job for the government is tough and
painful; and who knows if you’ll soon find another? So it’s much easier
to simply persuade yourself that you agree with the government, that
you’re doing the right and noble thing, that your work to earn a
paycheck is really a service to mankind.

Of course, it also helps that everyone you’re surrounded by feels the
same way. Culture is another important influence on our beliefs. Another
raft of social psychology studies find that people are willing to deny
even obvious truths to fit in with a group. In the famous Asch studies
on conformance, a group of confederates were seated around a table, with
the subject of the experiment on the end. Everyone at the table was
given a sheet with three lines, one obviously longer than the other, and
then was asked to name the two lines of identical length. All of the
confederates gave an obviously wrong answer and by the time the question
got to the guy at the end, he ended up conforming and giving the wrong
answer as well.

Similarly, spend your days in government offices where people simply
take it for granted that they’re doing the right thing, and you’re
likely to pick up that tacit assumption yourself. Such ideas are not
only frequently stated, they’re often the very foundation of the
discussion. And foundational ideas are particularly hard to question,
particularly because they’re so taken for granted.

But perhaps the most important effect for conformance is simply
selection. Imagine that nobody was corruptible, that all the carrots and
sticks in the world couldn’t get someone to do something they thought
morally wrong, that they stood fast in the face of cognitive dissonance,
and that their moral fiber was so strong that they were able to resist a
less conscientious culture. Even then, it wouldn’t make much difference.
As long as there was enough variety in people and their moral values,
all an organization would need to do is simply fire (or fail to promote)
everyone who didn’t play their game.

Everyone knows you climb the corporate ladder by being a “team player”.
Those who make a fuss or don’t quite live up to expectations simply get
passed over for a promotion. The result is simply that — without any
explicit pressure at all — the people in positions of power happen to be
the ones who identify with the organization’s aims.

It’s easy to look at the rather more flashy pieces of punishing people
for failing to follow orders or living in a culture of conformity. But
for those who want obedient employees, sometimes the most effective
technique is simply failing to say yes.


Products That Should Exist
==========================

December 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/buildme)

* * * * *

**A free Gmail clone.** A lot of people I know use Gmail for email. It’s
not because they don’t have access to servers or can’t afford a couple
gigabytes of disk space. It’s because Gmail is simply the best interface
for email out there right now. It’d be even better if it was free
software, though.

The biggest problem with Gmail is that you can’t run it offline. But if
it was free software, you could run it on your local machine and use it
even when not connected to the net. This would also have the nice
benefit of making it much faster for the user. Some synchronization code
would be necessary, but it’d be worth it.

Gmail isn’t all that complicated; this really shouldn’t be that hard.

**A nice OS X Tor interface.** I’ve talked to a bunch of people who
would like to use Tor, but find it just too complicated. Ideally, the
interface should be very simple. You download the Tor binary and
double-click it to start using Tor and quit out to stop. And so that you
know it’s working, it’ll have a little window that will show you the
names of servers you’re connected to.

OS X has APIs for changing the system preferences; just use those to set
the SOCKS server properly. Tor has APIs for finding out when you connect
to a server, use those to set the display. For a decent Mac programmer,
this can’t be more than a day’s worth of work, but it’d make Tor vastly
more usable.

**Decent backup software.** I’ve [already written about
this](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lazybackup). It still hasn’t
happened.

If anyone’s interested in building any of these, [let me
know](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) and perhaps we can work something out.


Happy New Year
==============

January 2, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/happynewyear)

* * * * *

Nobody seems to have noticed, but over the past couple months, this blog
has been publishing a record post a day. Every weekday — plus, starting
a little later, a bonus post on sundays — I’ve written an entirely new
essay. I’ve done this while traveling, while celebrating holidays, while
galavanting around the world, while sleeping on the couches of published
authors. I’ve even written and posted whole pieces using the SSH feature
on my cell phone.

I don’t know anyone else who has done this. There are columnists who
write for the paper, but they only have to post a couple times a week.
And there are bloggers who post many times a day, but they mostly post
links and commentary, not whole essays. As far as I know, I’m alone in
this bizarre pursuit.

It was a fun experiment but it was also a lot of work. I still have lots
to say, but I’m not sure that forcing myself to say it every day is
quite so healthy. I want to work on writing better, not just faster. I
wrote most of the blog posts in about an hour and while they’re decent
for something written at that rate, they can rarely be called great.

So I think it’s time to slow down, work more on crafting my prose, maybe
write for magazines and other outlets. (If someone out there wants to
publish me, [drop me a line](mailto:me@aaronsw.com)!) This will probably
hurt my readership, but running this blog has always been a weird and
random occupation, done more for me than for page views.

So I guess that’s goodbye for now and thanks for stopping by. If this
piece gets posted when it’s supposed to, it’s New Year’s Day and I’ve
still got a couple more weeks of winter break to spend world-travelling.
So expect some silence until I get back. *Au revoir!*


The Sociologist’s Creed
=======================

January 2, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/soccreed)

* * * * *

> Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please;
> they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under
> circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the past.
> The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the
> brains of the living.

(Karl Marx, [The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Napoleon](http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/18th-brumaire/ch01.htm))


The Capital of Scandinavia
==========================

January 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingsweden)

* * * * *

Sweden is a fascinating country, although it doesn’t appear that way at
first. The Stockholm airport tries hard to sell you on the city’s
importance, lining the walls with the faces of famous residents, none of
whom I recognize. Stockholm is “The Capital of Scandinavia”, at least
according to the wall, the information desk, and the “You Are Here”
signs spread around the city. All the signs are in English as well as
Swedish and we didn’t see a single person the entire trip who couldn’t
speak English (although one declined to).

Nor does the ride from the airport suggest anything special — the road
is lined with the office parks of big companies, much like the streets
of Silicon Valley. And the city seems, well, like a city, at least until
you realize that’s your apartment, not simply downtown.

Most American cities are still suffering from the “urban planning”
designed to keep non-existent factory fumes away from people’s homes.
Even in San Francisco, where all sorts of crazy things are crammed into
one small peninsula, there is still a clear separation of residence and
business — blocks of victorian row houses, then a cross street with a
bunch of shops.

But as far as I could tell, Stockholm doesn’t have any such residential
zones. All the apartments seemed to be on the floor above the normal
street life; the two deeply intertwingled; just the way I like it. (See
*The Death and Life of Great American Cities* for more reasons.)

The apartments — *all* the apartments — are rent controlled, one of the
socialist remnants in Sweden’s social democracy. In practice, this leads
to some odd results. No one ever gives up an apartment, so tenants feel
safe installing nameplates on their doors. Instead of giving up the
place, they give it to their family, their friends, or let their
children inherit it. Once you have an apartment contract, you can swap
it with anyone else’s (and there are web sites to help you do this), but
to get one you need to add your name to a list when you turn 18, and
then wait for ten to twenty years for an apartment to open up. Those
with money but not that kind of time instead pay under the table for a
contract.

There are no homeless people in Stockholm, but one person I spoke to
claimed that this was because the homeless didn’t know anyone with a
rent contract, so they all stayed in the suburbs, which they were more
familiar with anyway, and as a result there ended up being about as many
homeless per capita as in a the average American city.

Backlash politics is incredibly popular in the US, where there’s not
that much to backlash against, but it’s even more popular in Sweden,
where there’s some justification. US-style libertarians are everywhere,
this time with some actual justification for their persecution
complexes. Although not much. A new conservative government has recently
taken power and has pulled all the libertarians out to fill up the
political positions.

Our roommate just happened to hang out with libertarians in college; now
all her friends are top officials in the government. A smaller country,
it starts to seem like everyone knows everybody here (I suppose they all
went to college together).

Of course, there are still outsiders. The country has private email
mailing lists on which all the gossip about how the county is *actually*
run (and who the royalty is *actually* screwing) is shared among the
prominent journalists and other figures. (There are similar secret lists
in other fields, including one for the left-wing of the US Democratic
Party.) Journalists know that sharing that kind of information with the
public simply isn’t done and those who violate the rules are
unceremoniously kicked off. Occasionally a young reporter uses their
column to complain they’re not on the list, but the people in the know
just laugh at them.

It’s the same kind of laugh you imagine Sweden’s IKEA founders having
[as you marvel at their clever tax-dodging
schemes](http://www.economist.com/PrinterFriendly.cfm?story_id=6919139).
IKEA, the famed Swedish interior design chain now sweeping the US, is
owned by a company called Ingka Holding, which is actually owned by a
tax-exempt not-for-profit — the world’s largest, even larger than the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. (Not that selling interior
furnishings is at all comparable to curing Malaria.) The not-for-profit
channels its funds to a Dutch foundation which is operated by a Swiss
lawyer friend but shares some of its assets with another Dutch company
which is owned by a Luxembourg holding company which is owned by a
company in the Netherlands which is run by a trust in the Carribean. You
can probably guess where the tax-free money goes from there.

IKEA is everywhere in Sweden. Their couches fill the tiny
rent-controlled apartments, their chairs are found in everyone’s
offices, and when you finish your drink the light shining through the
bottom of the glass illuminates the word: IKEA.


A Moment Before Dying
=====================

January 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dying)

* * * * *

There is a moment, immediately before life becomes no longer worth
living, when the world appears to slow down and all its myriad details
suddenly become brightly, achingly apparent.

For Alex, that moment came after exactly one week of pain, seven days of
searing, tormenting agony that poured forth from his belly. Alex never
liked his belly. Growing up he was always fat, surrounded by a family of
bellowing, rotund Americans, who had a room in their house with
wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling cabinets, all entirely filled with bags
and boxes of various pre-processed semi-organic assemblages, which they
used to stuff their faces at all hours of the day.

Alex had body image issues. He’d avoid mirrors because he couldn’t bear
to look at himself, his large bulbous cheeks obscuring his fine
features. He avoided photos, covering his face or ducking out of the way
when the click of the camera came, for the same reason: he didn’t want
to be confronted with the physical evidence of his disgusting nature,
thought he could not go on living if he had to face the truth.

It wasn’t until he got away from his family that he discovered his
weight was not an immutable characteristic, like the fingerprints he
often mused about burning off, like the dental records which had caused
him so much adolescent anguish, like the DNA he’d heard so much about in
school. He would take off his shirt and stare at his stomach in the
full-length mirror. It was there, of course, hideous as ever, but also
appreciably smaller. Its size, he realized, could change.

So Alex starved himself. Cut down from three meals a day to simply two
and then to only one. And even that became superfluous most days. Alex
simply wasn’t hungry.

He watched his stomach dwindle, monitored his progress on the electronic
readout of his at-home scale, charted the numbers on his computer,
admired the plunging trendlines.

He was doing so well. He told all his friends. The secret to losing
weight, he would explain, is simply not eating. You just get used to it
after a while. He looked at the beggars outside his window and refrained
from giving them change so that they too could experience this miracle.
He changed the channel when the radio began speaking about starvation in
Africa. “Starvation isn’t so bad,” he scoffed. “You get used to it after
a while.” He wondered whether the USDA thrifty food budget could be
further reduced.

He stopped going out. His friends always wanted to meet him for meals,
or for drinks, events in which Alex simply wasn’t interested anymore.
Before long, Alex’s friends were no longer interested in him.

Alex started eating in cafés, ordering a small pastry, sitting in a
comfortable chair, listening to the music play over the loudspeakers.
Soon he stopped doing even that.

Alex read on the Internet about death. There was a theory, increasingly
well supported, that eating is what killed you. They found that rats on
extremely restricted diets, rats who ate very few calories, lived
impressively long. They saw the same results with other animals, up to
and including chimpanzees. They suspected, but could not prove, the same
was true of humans. Every little bite of food was another step towards
death.

Alex started eating again. His appetite grew as slowly as it had
declined but within months he was back to eating three meals a day. Food
suddenly gave him pleasure again. He savored the tastes on his tongue.

One night he and his friends decided to try a new restaurant. But when
the food came, Alex couldn’t eat it. He thought it smelled funny. He let
it sit there, his plate lying on the table, his food seething,
untouched.

The next night Alex couldn’t sleep. He’d wake up, feeling searing pains
in his stomach, as if the food winding its way through his gut had
spikes and was tearing apart the walls of his intestine.

He suffered like this for days, rolling on the floor in agony, unable to
resist eating but every bite he ate causing him unimaginable pain. And
still, he could not stop.

Five days in, it seemed like the worst had passed. The pains came less
frequently, the pains were less intense. He actually slept that night.

The day Alex killed himself, he was awoken by pains, worse than ever. He
rolled back-and-forth in bed as the sun came up, the light streaming
through the windows eliminating the chance for any further sleep. At 9,
he was startled by a phone call. The pains subsided, as if quieting down
to better hear what the phone might say.

It was his boss. He had not been to work all week. He had been fired.
Alex tried to explain himself, but couldn’t find the words. He hung up
the phone instead.

The day Alex killed himself, he wandered his apartment in a daze. The
light streaming through the windows gave everything a golden glow, which
had the odd effect of making the filth he’d become surrounded with seem
cinematic.

Alex wanted to go outside for one last meal, but he had trouble making
the appropriate connections. Jacket, shoes, pants, wallet. Each lay in a
different spot upon the floor. Alex knew they went together, he drew
lines connecting them in his mind’s eye, but it didn’t see to fix
anything, his eyes just kept bouncing from one item to another.

Finally, he summoned the intelligence to put them on. The world seemed
funny afterwards. He noticed the way the key turned in the lock, like a
hand rotating in front of his face, an interplay of light and shadow,
objects in space. He noticed the packages sitting at his doorstep,
begging him to open them, but their labels insisting that they were
addressed to someone else. He noticed the frail old ladies who refused
to obey the walk—don’t walk signs and instead walked slowly, backs
hunched, across a major intersection.

He went to a new café across the street, the one place he hadn’t been to
yet. Light streamed in through the huge picture windows, making the
whole place seem bright and airy. So much light, in fact, that the
outside seemed a glow, as if the café was suspended in the middle of a
powerful white light. People held lowered, indistinct conversations.
People on his left, people on his right, people behind him. But one
conversation seemed to be coming from the ceiling. It might have been a
trick of the acoustics. He looked up and saw two speakers staring back
at him and listened closely.

The café was not playing music. It was playing a recording of two
people’s lowered, indistinct conversation.

The day Alex killed himself, he had a sudden, powerful craving for a Key
Lime Sugar Cookie. It was odd the power the Key Lime Sugar Cookie had
over him. Alex did not particularly like limes of any sort. In fact, the
idea of an actual actual, as with all fruits, thoroughly disgusted him.
He hated how when he ordered sparkling water at fancy restaurants they
would place a lime wedge on the top of his glass, how he had to confront
the disgusting object every time he tried to take a sip, how touching
the lime, even to remove it, was so digusting as to be simply out of the
question.

And yet, here it was, this cookie, with the lime flavor baked into the
center and large transparent grains of sugar embedded in the top,
begging for him, begging for one last taste. The cookie was sold
exclusively by a publicly-traded chain of cafés that tried hard to seem
international, giving itself a foreign-sounding title and printing the
names of major world cities on every door, even though it had not
expanded much beyond the eastern half of the United States. Alex
purchased the cookie.

He noticed the way he couldn’t quite form the words to request it,
simply presented the cookie in front of the cashier and twitched his
head, assuming (correctly) that in context the request would be
understood. He noticed the way his hands moved haphazardly to remove the
appropriate amount of money from his wallet. He noticed the way his
change spilled out onto the counter as he tried to find the quarter with
which to complete the transaction. He noticed the way he wobbled as he
walked as he took the now-purchased cookie outside.

The day Alex killed himself, he savored his one remaining cookie, the
sweetness of the embedded sugar grains, the bizarre flavor of what must
have been lime. He used his tongue to wipe the remaining crumbs from his
teeth, tossed the now-empty bag it had come in into the trash, and
stepped out into the middle of the street.


Last Day of Summer Camp
=======================

January 22, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/summercamp)

* * * * *

Ten calls are coming through on my cell phone at once. I try to answer
them in order. Finally I get to my mom. “Just wanted to see how you
are,” she says. “Oh, by the way, Alexis called the cops.” I try to treat
this as nonchalantly as she is, but mean while I’m running to find my
pants. I don my gray hoodie, grab my keys, lock the door behind me, and
run out into the street, finally saying goodbye. I just make it — I see
the cops coming in front of my door as I make it to the next block.

I know exactly what to do in these kinds of situations; I’ve seen it in
all the movies. Turn off the wireless on the cell phone, pay for
everything in cash, don’t use RFID cards, stick to sidestreets. I stick
to sidestreets, but I still hear the cop sirens buzzing down all the
major roads. There are major roads on every side of me.

* * * * *

The lady across the aisle from me on the plane is pleading with the
flight attendant. She holds her small dog between her legs (“oh, don’t
worry,” she had explained, “he’ll stop barking once we take off”),
covered in only a blanket. The attendant is down on his knees, trying to
understand what she wants. He disappears and later I see the woman
pouring a small bottle of alcohol into her drink.

Apparently this was a mistake. The woman starts screaming profanity,
locking herself in the bathroom, running up and down the aisles.
Finally, she’s forcibly restrained. The pilot comes on loud over the
intercom, thanks us for our patience, explains that you’re not supposed
to mix alcohol with certain psychoactive medications, tells us law
enforcement will be meeting us at the gate.

Law enforcement meets us at the gate. “Please remain in your seats,”
comes the pilot’s voice. “Law enforcement has taken control of the air
craft. No one is permitted to move until law enforcement releases its
control of the air craft.” Law enforcement relinquishes the air craft
and as I exit I see the woman, with a couple policeman in front of her,
asking her if she can see the fingers they’re holding up.

“God,” I think. “Didn’t I just go through this yesterday?”

* * * * *

I forgot how much I hate San Francisco. The bus takes an hour to arrive,
while I have to stand in the human filth of the city. For some reason
they put the major bus transfer point at the same place drug dealers
congregate. It’s not a very fun place to wait.

I finally get home and tumble into the mat that makes up my bed.

Next thing I remember I’m in the Moscone Center. MacWorld is over, but a
few signs and people are still around. I look out a window for a bit and
a guy taps me on the shoulder. “I think they’re trying to punk Paul
Graham in that room,” he says, pointing. I go and see.

Paul Graham is indeed in that room, as is his girlfriend and my
co-founders and the other Y Combinators I know and a bunch of people I
don’t recognize (probably this year’s batch of Y Combinators). They
start surrounding me. I begin to suspect a trap.

“What’s going on here?” I ask Steve. “Wait a second, you brought me
here, didn’t you?” “What are you talking about?” Steve replies. “I mean,
I remember going to sleep, I remember kind of wanting to wake up, but
then all of the sudden I’m in the Moscone Center? How did I get here?
You must have brought me here, didn’t you?”

Steve denies all knowledge, but there’s a gleam in his eye.

The people surrounding me take a step closer.

“Alright,” I say. “I’ll make a deal. If I can tickle every last one of
you, I go free. Otherwise, you win.”

They seem to accept the deal.

I begin tickling.

People begin running, dodging, flying around the room. But I’m like a
heat-seeking missile. I track down every one of them, extend my hands
out, go straight for their armpits.

I win.

* * * * *

I wake up on my mat. The sun is shining brightly. It’s a beautiful day.
I whistle a happy tune. I go to wait for the bus. One bus goes by, it’s
too full to stop. Another comes by after what seems like an eternity.
It’s almost as full, but I’m not going to wait for yet another. I hang
from the bar overhead, just barely fitting inside. There’s no room for
my feet.

The bus gets off a couple blocks from my office. To get there, I have to
walk past the Moscone Center. That’s when it comes back to me. I look
hard at the Moscone Center. “Oh,” I say. “It must have been a dream.”

* * * * *

“Goooood Monday morning,” I say, entering my office. That’s kind of my
little thing, my little ritual. “Goooood XXX morning,” I say in a happy
voice, replacing the XXX with the name of the day I’m saying it on. I
only say it once each day.

My co-worker is ignoring me.

* * * * *

I am presented with a letter accepting my resignation. I am told to
collect my “personal effects”. A woman from HR politely escorts me from
the premises. She never says that she is escorting me, but she does
stand behind me wherever I go. I think I am supposed to leave.

I leave. The sun is shining brightly. It’s a beautiful day.


The Fundamental Law of Sociology
================================

January 23, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fundsoc)

* * * * *

There are some loons on the Internet trying to spread the idea that the
fundamental law of sociology is the black-white test score gap. Put
aside the fact that anyone who would even think of proposing such an
absurd thing must be a raving scientific racist.

And put aside the fact that they must also be fairly stupid, because
such a claim is, at best, a discovery about a particular society, and
not a law. (Can you imagine someone claiming that “falling objects
accelerate at 32 feet per second per second” is a fundamental law of
physics?)

Even put aside the fact that no actual sociologist would even go near
such a claim, as the field’s entire purpose is to investigate *social*
causes of such phenomena.

No, let us look at an actual fundamental law of sociology, the Thomas
theorem. The Thomas theorem says “If men define situations as real, they
are real in their consequences.”

Now think about what that means about claiming the black-white test
score gap is an immutable law.

*Extra credit:* Research “stereotype threat”.


Fired
=====

January 24, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fired)

* * * * *

![Fired](image1_fired)

Shirt [courtesy Danny O’Brien](http://www.spesh.com/danny/wireduk/).

[image1_fired]: image1_fired.jpg

Berlin
======

January 30, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/23c3)

* * * * *

A giant death star-like ball hovers over Berlin’s Alexanderplatz, a
remnant of the Cold War struggle to seem powerful. Its lit from
underneath, casting it an ominous glow, just the kind of comically-evil
thing you’d see in a bad movie.

Just across the way is a childlike spaceship standing in front of a
glowing dome and inside — well, inside, as a person at the desk put it
in their thick German accent, “everything is a little bit chaos”.

The Chaos Communications Congress has taken over the building. The dome
on the top floor is filled an ongoing series of interesting talks, the
lounge underneath it is filled with couches and rugs and rocking music
for people to hang out, and the floor beneath that is filled with people
in front of monitors watching the warm glow of computer code scroll by.
The place is filled with hackers.

I don’t particularly like computers, but there’s a definite charm to
these people’s cast of mind. They like to get stuff done. There are
tables with soldering irons and pliers and lego blocks and cubes of
blinking lights and animation software and magnifying glasses and more.
One group has built little blinking tags that figure out which room
you’re in and report it to a central server. Another has shown everyone
how to purchase VOIP phones from the electronics store across the
street, hook them up to a conference network they’ve built, and then
return them when the conference is over. Others are showing off the
stuff they’ve built, from software that can let you surf the Internet
completely anonymously to laptops that can be distributed to the Third
World for \$100 a pop.

For these people, there’s no separation between work and fun. It’s not
like other conferences where you sit during the day in quiet seats
taking notes on carefully preselected talks and then spend the nights
out drinking with your buddies. You can spend the days drinking and the
nights listening to talks, each blending into each other, with games and
working and gabbing on the side. Couches next to lectures, couches in
lectures, lectures from couches.

Even if you don’t like the subject matter, you have to admire the
atmosphere. What other group has a place like this, existing somewhere
between occupation and hobby and subculture, between conference and
convention and hangout? It’s fun, it’s educational; it’s occupation,
it’s friendship; it’s building, it’s destroying. It is, indeed, a little
bit chaos.


Cities
======

January 30, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/densest)

* * * * *

The densest cities in America, [according to the 1990
census](http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027.html#tabA):

1.  New York, NY (7M people over 309 sq. mi.)
2.  San Francisco, CA (.7M in 47)
3.  Chicago, IL (2M in 227)
4.  Boston, MA (.5M in 48)
5.  Philadelphia, PA (1.5M in 135)

Maybe there is something to my wanting to move to Philadelphia after
all.

* * * * *

Everyone’s been complaining about how I’m too critical, too much of a
downer. Well, here you go: it’s **the nice week**. Five posts on five
cities saying only nice things. Hope you enjoy it as much as I do.


Dresden
=======

January 30, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dresden)

* * * * *

Hop on a train from Berlin and before you even notice your eyes have
closed you’ll be waking up in Dresden. The streets are dark but the
light pours out from bars and you make your way down a sidestreet to
your quirky, beaten apartment and tumble into bed, ready to wake up and
tackle the next morning.

And what a morning it is: the sun shines through a solid gray sky,
giving everything a cast of history and emotional depth. This is how
Europe was meant to look — a bridge stretches across a sweeping river to
a skyline of grand and time-battered buildings. A man plays old songs on
an accordion and you follow the twisting cobblestone streets through the
kind of grand edifices that only kings would build.

Upscale shops are mixed in with the glorious old buildings, people
bustle every which way, and a fantastic network of streetcars takes you
wherever you wish to go. Shops and cafes open onto picturesque views of
a city with more charm than you could dare to hope for.

The skyline is made up of churches and synagogues and government
buildings and hotels and art museums and schools. The center is
surrounded by districts of hip bike stores, clothing shops, restaurants.
A church with the top blown off is now used for concerts and parties.
Apartment buildings have been built in bomb craters.

There are few places that live up to the beauty of the imagination —
Harvard Square exists romantically only for a few days in the fall. But
here is Dresden, the picture of beauty, in the heart of Europe. The
riverbank sweeps majestically and curves past you and heads off into the
distance as the sun sets into its flowing waters. And then you head
home.


Stockholm
=========

January 31, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stockholm)

* * * * *

Visit Sweden’s National Gallery and you’ll see grand murals, elegant
sculpture, classical paintings. It’s exactly the kind of thing you’d
expect from an ornate old building across the street from the royal
palace. But one floor down you’ll find something that seems rather out
of place: an art exhibit with copyright in the title.

The exhibit, a brochure explains, “links up with today’s debate about
illegal downloading of music and film files from the Internet.” It’d be
interesting enough if illegal downloading was such a live issue that art
galleries were using it to try to get kids to come visit (can you
imagine the Art Institute of Chicago promoting an exhibit by trying to
claim it was related to *Grand Theft Auto*?) but the exhibit actually
lived up to its claims: it was a penetrating investigation of what it
means to be a creative artist in the age of mass production, one of the
most thoughtful art exhibits I’ve ever seen.

Copyright is still a live issue here in Sweden, perhaps best illustrated
by the now world-famous The Pirate Bay website. Despite the site’s
arrogant name and attitude (“I’m running out of toilet paper, so please
send lots of legal documents to our ISP,” they
[replied](http://static.thepiratebay.org/sega_response2.txt) to one
legal complaint) what it provides is apparently quite legal in Sweden.
The site is a BitTorrent tracker, helping your computer get in touch
with others who are sharing (usually copyrighted) files. Because it only
assists in copyright infringement and doesn’t do any copyright
violations itself, the Swedish government has had a hard time shutting
the site down.

Not that they haven’t tried — the MPAA pushed the government into
raiding and seizing all the servers of the Bay and their ISP,
[prq.se](http://prq.se/), including servers for websites that received
special government protection as media outlets.

The Pirate Bay was originally a project of Piratbyrån (lit. “Piracy
Bureau”), a Swedish activist organization created to combat Big
Content’s Antipiratbyrån (lit. “Anti-Piracy Bureau”). The organization’s
spokesman, Rasmus Fleischer, has become something of a household name in
Sweden. Journalists now regularly call the Piratbyrån for responses to
claims by the Antipiratbyrån and Fleischer regularly gives talks on the
topic of piracy. When I met him he was getting ready for a *Vanity Fair*
photo shoot the following day.

Random people on the street here have attended Rasmus Fleischer talks.
Indeed, random people on the street here work with famous computer
scientists, random people on the street use reddit, random people on the
street pirate files. Stockholm has odd streets.

At the same time, a third organization — the Swedish Piratpartiet — is
trying to change the laws through electoral mechanisms. Despite being a
fairly single-issue political party, in their first election, they won
.63% of the popular vote and is now bigger than the Swedish Green Party.
(In school mock elections, it won a whopping 4.5%, which gives you some
idea of its political base.)

But dividing up the parties into clearly separate organizations isn’t
the most sensible way of looking at it. For the most part, the
organizations consist of IRC channels where friendly people sit around
swapping notes and working on little projects they’re interested in. For
a non-profit, such a structure sounds hideously disorganized. But it’s
precisely how most free software projects get developed.

A kid drops out of school to intern with the pirates. Some filmmakers
put together [a documentary](http://stealthisfilm.com/) on the subject.
Journalists file freedom of information act requests to reveal who’s
really behind the Pirate Bay raids. Kids post fliers for the Pirate
Party. It smells like the beginnings of a movement.


Cambridge
=========

February 1, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cambridge)

* * * * *

There’s something magical about Harvard Square. I’ve hardly been all
over the world, but I’ve been a bunch of places, and nothing can quite
compare to the electricity I feel every time I visit this spot in the
center of Cambridge.

One one side, the gates of Harvard University. On another, the campus
book store. On the third, a pit where kids hang out and bands sometimes
perform and street performers crowd around. On the fourth, a shopping
district.

Cut down Dunster and you find yourself facing the Harvard Lampoon
building. Follow the road a bit and you’ll see the mix of shops and
Harvard dorms. Keep going and you’ll find the riverside. If it’s a fall
day, the trees will be turning brown and the sky and river will be blow
and a couple boats will be rowing down the stream and you’ll breathe in
the air and wonder if there could ever be any paradise more perfect.

Across the river is the tree-lined campus of the Harvard Business
School, but turn back up JFK Street and you’ll see hotels and shops and
cafes and parks and boulevards. Everything you’ll ever need is there and
cars and people intermingle, looking content.

Make a left on Brattle and follow it a ways and you’ll see a little dip
in the street. Another singer has set up shop there and kids are sitting
on the stone slab in front, listening to the songs, lying on their
backs, reading books.

Stop into the Coop or the Harvard Bookstore and you can pick up a book
of your own. Or cross the street into the famed Harvard Yard, the
tree-lined quad where college students sit and run and walk. The paths
meander past the dorms and classrooms, open up in parks with cafe tables
where vendors sell sandwiches, close up again to head towards the
library.

The library, the big building right in the middle, a giant edifice in
praise of collected knowledge, its big stone steps streaming down as if
to say *you too may be elevated*. Inside, the soaring archways, the
country’s largest library (after the Library of Congress), the floors
and floors of stacks, the underground additions, books seeping into the
groundwater of the campus.

The knowledge infects everything. Kids in the street talk about the
arrangement of bones, the politics of the economy, the topology of
mathematical spaces. Even the service staff get into the act: as you sit
in a cafe, the college dropout clerk argues with the immigrant cook
about the political necessity of marriage and the status of its legality
in various countries.

The seasons come here, just as you imagined: the sweltering heat of
summer, the overpowering beauty of fall, the snow-capped vistas of
winter, the budding excitement of spring. There is a city, an ocean, a
river, a suburb, a harbor, and a bike path. There is a subway, but it’s
not strictly necessary. The city is small enough that it can be walked
across, simple enough that it can all fit in your head. It’s not a place
that you can soon forget.


San Francisco
=============

February 3, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sanfrancisco)

* * * * *

“So I find myself back in California,” sings Quasi. And so I do. I spend
half my life trying to get here, I spend the rest trying to get away.
But here I finally am, and perhaps it’s time to simply give in.

California is large; it contains multitudes. Locals claim the peninsula
is so big and irregular that it even contains microclimates — areas with
different weather patterns. There is the glorious hill of Alamo Square,
near the apartment I stay in, from which you can see the houses featured
in the opening credits of *Full House* and watch the city stretch out
below you. As you cross the street to head to the park, if you turn your
head in the middle to watch for cars, you see a glorious road roll
downwards, ending at a monumental city hall building, a glowing golden
dome.

Or if you climb Twin Peaks, the hill overlooking Noe Valley, one night,
the streetlights make the buildings below look like cardboard backdrops
and a rolling grid of points of light sweeps out behind it, hills
culminating in the tall buildings that make up the San Francisco
skyline.

Or there’s Valencia street, the oddball mix of pirate supply shops,
burger joints, bike stores, hipster coffee houses and breakfast places,
alongside restaurants of every ethnicity.

And, of course, the city is filled with brilliant and fun people.
Marxist sex columnists, investigative technology reporters,
self-experimenting tenured professors, crimefighting lawyers, activist
technologists, startup founders, hackers, hipsters. I could hang out
with these people forever.

Then one morning I awoke to find three of my favorite people inviting me
to find a brilliant new place in the city and be their roommate. It’s a
hard offer to resist, no matter the city. It’s the day before I leave
for my Christmas trip to Europe and I promise myself that before I go
I’ll see the Sunset. I finish up all my work tasks and run as fast as I
can to catch the streetcar that winds its way through the city, past
pastel houses on rolling hills, past video stores and laundromats, past
cafes and bakeries, past offices and parks.

And then we hit the end of the peninsula, a road and then a hill and
then a beach. And there it is, [just like in
LA](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingla), the sun setting right
before me, casting a glow over the beach. And the fog is rolling of the
hills in the nice lines that you thought only existed in heavily
photoshopped pictures and you watch the waves on the beach roll up to
your feet and the beauty overtakes you and you fall back against the
hill and there’s really only one thing you can say, even if it’s to no
one but yourself:

“Alright, San Francisco. I concede. You win.”


Justifications for Myself
=========================

February 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rhetocc)

* * * * *

You’re at a party and you find yourself sitting next to an rather
geeky-looking fellow with thick black glasses. He looks like a nice
enough guy and, after all, making smalltalk is only polite, so you ask
him what he does. “I’m an entomologist,” he explains. “Oh,” you say,
stalling for time. “An entomologist.” You search your databanks for
something you can say regarding entomology. “Doesn’t it get boring
pasting all those little bugs onto those little cards?” you say. He
looks you straight in the eye. “Actually, no,” he says. “It’s not like
that at all.”

Michael Bérubé seems to often find himself as that man at the party. As
an academic at a state college in Pennsylvania, he’s surrounded by
Republicans who want to cut off public support for tenured radicals like
him. As a postmodern literary theorist who writes for public-interest
journals, he’s surrounded by those who think his field is meaninglessly
obscure. As a professor of cultural studies, he’s surrounded by those
who think he’s wasting his time researching trash. And as a cultural
leftist with liberal political views, he’s surrounded by friends who
find his nuanced political views a personal affront.

In *Rhetorical Occasions*, Bérubé collects a series of essays, speeches,
articles, and blog posts in which he tries his best to defend himself
from all such charges. And while that doesn’t sound like a recipe for
good literature, he makes it work. Like my entomologist friend, Bérubé
is such a kind-hearted, clear-spoken fellow that it’s fun to simply hear
him out. The result is a book even better than Bérubé’s [2006
bestseller](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/radicalarts), *What’s Liberal
About the Liberal Arts?*

The difference is that this time Bérubé is writing for his fellow
insiders, not outsiders, so instead of his cleaned-up defense of
academic life and his tidied-up summaries of freshman classes, you get
the real dirt on the way people dig knives into each other at MLA
meetings and excerpts from graduate introductory courses.

The book isn’t always perfect. Bérubé’s writes clearly and well, but
sometimes even his careful explanations assume a bit too much background
from the reader. “It sounds almost like a Monty Python bit,” he says at
one point; “you expect to hear next that Alexander Kerensky was defeated
by the experimental poetics of the Opoyaz group, and that the Battle of
the Journals set the terms for the Second Congress of Soviets in October
1917.” I have to admit, that was not what I was expecting to hear next.

And while Bérubé is fairly good about mentioning his opponents’
arguments (and this is a book with a lot of opponents, from ice hockey
players to Stanley Fish), he sometimes responds to them with an
obtuseness that borders on intellectual dishonesty. He notes that he was
“derided on the far left [for] my craven desire to break into corporate
mass media by repudiating Chomsky. I wrote it for *Context: A Forum for
Literary Arts and Culture*, [a journal] not available for purchase
anywhere in the country. It is distributed only to independent
bookstores, in print runs of five thousand. So I wonder just how much
further from the corporate mass media Chomsky’s fans would like me to
get before I am permitted to disagree with them.” It’s one of the book’s
best lines, at least until you get a couple essays later when you find
Bérubé reprised the criticism for an op-ed in the *Boston Globe*.

But the meat of the book is not in Bérubé’s politics (which, reprising
discussions between 9/11 and the war in Iraq, actually made me feel
queasy), but in his academics. In even intellectual popular culture,
it’s hard to find examples of postmodern literary theory that are
anything other than critics taking a whack or exponents making it easy
for them. Alan Sokal gets up and says that social constructionism is
absurd and Stanley Fish fights back by insisting the rules of physics
are just as manmade as the rules of baseball. Roger Kimball complaints
that postmodern theorists are being deliberately obtuse and Slavoj Žižek
responds by wondering whether “Heidegger’s ‘deconstruction’ of the
metaphysics of subjectivity … undermine[s] the very possibility of a
philosophically grounded resistance.”

But Bérubé manages to make such debates seem comprehensible and, what’s
more, worth comprehending. Bérubé’s passing references to “Stephen
Greenblatt, Catherine Gallagher, nancy Armstrong, Even Sedgwick, and
Judith Butler” makes you think that recognizing such names is as much a
duty of an educated person as following Sokal’s references to Niels
Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and (as in famous footnote 26) Rebecca
Goldstein.

I just hope there are more patient teachers like Bérubé to help one
finish the job.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0807857777)



Neurosis \#9
============

February 7, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/imposition)

* * * * *

So here I am. We’re somewhere over a dark patch in the middle of the
country and I’m in the window seat in the last row in the plane. The guy
in front of me’s leaning all the way back, but I’m in the last row so my
seat doesn’t go back, and I have to lift my legs up to stretch out a
muscle that was sitting funny while I was asleep. So here I sit,
scrunched up in the the last row of the plane, my thighs hugged against
my chest, my knees digging into the seat in front of me, my back curved
funny from being unable to recline. But that’s not the problem.

No, the problem is that I am terribly, almost unbearably, thirsty. My
mouth has been dry for hours, we’re long past that. Now I’m so thirsty
that the color has drained from my face, because there simply is no
fluid left to keep it there. I am so thirsty that it’s beginning to feel
like there’s no water around to hydrate my brain so my neocortex is
getting and shrivelling up. It’s an odd feeling, your brain shriveling
up. It makes it hard to think. But I guess that’s not really the problem
either.

The problem, the real problem I suppose, is that I can’t ask for
anything to drink. I am perfectly justified — I was asleep during the
drink service, I am quite terribly thirsty, my flight is unusually
uncomfortable to begin with — yet I cannot bring myself to do it. As the
flight attendants walk briskly by, I fail to catch their eyes. And the a
man sitting in the seat next to me on the aisle has headphones on, so I
can’t exactly interrupt him. I could ring my flight attendant call
button, but I’ve never quite been able to bring myself to do that. I’m
so close to the flight attendants anyway.

If I rang the call button, I tell myself, I wouldn’t ask for a Sprite.
I’d just ask for water. Asking for a Sprite, it’d seem like I was
interrupting them just so I could get my soda fix. Like I was some sort
of petulant child who had to have his soda and was going to throw a
temper tantrum if they didn’t get it. Like a troublemaker, the kind of
person they look down on. But water? Water they’d understand: it was a
genuine medical request, a normal, physical human need. Something
totally worth taking the extraordinary step of pressing the flight
attendant call button.

But I can’t bring myself to do it. It seems like such an imposition.

This, I suppose, is the actual problem: I feel my existence is an
imposition on the planet. Not a huge one, perhaps, not a huge one at
all, but an imposition nonetheless. When I go to a library and I see the
librarian at her desk reading, I’m afraid to interrupt her, even though
she sits there specifically so that she may be interrupted, even though
being interrupted by for reasons like this by people like me is her very
job. At the fast food restaurant, I feel embarrassed taking time to pick
through my pocket for appropriate change, so I always give them whole
bills, then feel embarrassed when they have to take the time to count
*me* out change. When someone asks me what high school I’m going to, I
feel awkward explaining to them that I’ve gone to high school and to
college and then started a company and sold it, so I just stutter a bit
and then tell them that my high school is outside of Chicago.

I realize this is neurotic. Maybe not the high school thing, maybe
that’s just politeness, but certainly the thing right now, the brain
shriveling with the knees digging and yet still the fear of asking for
some water. “This is neurotic, Aaron,” I say to myself. “You are being
neurotic. It is not normal to be this shy. And geez, certainly you of
all people have little justification for being so undemanding.”

I am a good person, I mean. I work hard, I happily pay my taxes, I think
of ways to make the world a better place, I always look the woman behind
the counter in the eye and say “thank you, thank you,” as if I really
mean it, as if I really do appreciate the effort it took for her punch
my order into her cash register and withdraw the right amount of change.
And I do! So I deserve this, I deserve my glass of water, my can of
soda. I am not like one of those people who goes around robbing banks
and mugging old ladies and then stands in front of me in the supermarket
line, throwing a tantrum about how dare the clerk not accept my credit
card. No, *I* am perfectly justified in asking for a glass of water. I
know all this, and yet, somehow, I still feel like an imposition.

Normally, it’s not so bad feeling this way. Normally, I just sit in my
quiet little room and do the small things that bring me pleasures. I
read my books, I answer email, I write a little bit. I’m not such a
nuisance to the world, and the kick I get out of living can, I suppose,
justify the impositions I make on it. But when life isn’t so fun, well,
then I start to wonder. What’s the point of going on if it’s just
trouble for us both?

My friends will miss me, I am told. And I guess it’s somewhat better
around friends. For some reason asking them for things doesn’t seem
quite so bad. Perhaps we’ve established some rapport, perhaps I feel
I’ve given *them* enough to justify my small requests, perhaps I feel
like my friends are special people who think along the same lines I do
and thus understand my needs. (Inner critic: “Yeah, only a fellow genius
would understand your special need for *water*. Jesus, what a dweeb.”)
But even so, I feel reticent. Even among my closest friends, I still
feel like something of an imposition, and the slightest shock, the
slightest hint that I’m correct, sends me scurrying back into my hole.

I know, I know, I’m wrong, I’m wrong to feel this way. My friends love
me. They remark, spontaneously, about how nice it is to have me around.
They invite me over to their houses to hang out. Indeed, at this very
moment, two of my very favorite people to hang out with are actually
fighting — fighting! — over the supposed privilege of having me live
with them. “I just want to point out,” one says, “that I have never
tickled you.” “I just want to point out,” replies the other, “that I
have never gotten you to attach clothespins to your face.”

Clearly, rationally, I am in the wrong. These people like me. (Inner
cynic: “If only to have someone around to tickle and pinch.”) No, no,
they genuinely like me. But the idea that people might actually *want*
to be around me takes an amazing amount of getting used to. Last night,
for the first time, I invited some people over to my apartment. I’ve
never done this before. But, to my amazement, they all came. They even
brought their friends. I ran out of chairs. The idea that a group of
people would want to come over to see me was kind of stunning. Someone
even brought wine.

OK, so perhaps there is a small group of people who, whether through
quirks of genetics or some childhood trauma, appear, as best as I can
tell, to actively enjoy my company. (Inner elitist: “Or just need
excuses to drink wine?”) But this does not excuse my impositions on the
store clerk, the librarian, the man inquiring after my high school who I
downright lied to — *lied* to! — just to avoid pointing out the error of
his preconceptions, the bus driver who I had to distract with my
inability to use the new stored-value payment machines, or the waiter at
that restaurant I went to the other day who, I later realized to my
endless mortification, I forgot to properly tip. (Waiter, if you’re out
there, please send me your address so I can mail you your tip! I’m so
sorry!) These people did not request the dubious pleasure of my company.
I have no justification for bothering them with my requests.

Oh, but you know, I really want some water…


The Logic of Open DRM
=====================

February 7, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/opendrm)

* * * * *

In his recent essay, [Thoughts on
Music](http://www.apple.com/hotnews/thoughtsonmusic/), Apple CEO Steve
Jobs has called for the labels to stop requiring him to sell their music
with DRM. Most of his argument is that the labels already sell the vast
majority of their music perfect digital copies without DRM — namely, CDs
— but he also argues that the alternative of having an “open” DRM system
is impossible.

Jobs is less than clear here. He writes: “There is no theory of
protecting content other than keeping secrets. In other words, even if
one uses the most sophisticated cryptographic locks to protect the
actual music, one must still ‘hide’ the keys which unlock the music on
the user’s computer or portable music player. No one has ever
implemented a DRM system that does not depend on such secrets for its
operation.”

Since this is a fairly important point and no one else is explaining
what he means, I thought I’d give it a try.

DRM works by encrypting songs. Encryption works by performing a
mathematical scrambling operation that can only be reversed with the
right “key”. As a very simple example, imagine you have the message
“hello” and the key “5”. One simple encryption system is to simply move
each letter five letters forward (so “a” becomes “f”) and you get
“mjqqt”. To decode it, you just need to know the number 5 and move each
letter back that far. (This is a very bad encryption system, for a lot
of reasons, but it works the same basic way as the good ones.)

The way DRM works, essentially, is that when you buy a song from the
iTunes store it’s encrypted with a certain secret key (presumably one a
lot bigger than the number 5). To play the music, you need the key to
decrypt it. But the only software that has the key is iTunes and iTunes
will only decrypt it if you’re following their rules — only playing it
on 5 separate machines, for example.

For “Open DRM” to work, Apple would need to give the key to other people
who made music players. But as soon as Apple gives the key to someone,
they can do whatever they want with the music. If the key gets out on
the Internet, anyone can decrypt the songs. DRM only works because the
key is secret. Open DRM is an oxymoron.


The Enemy Too Close to Home
===========================

February 8, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dsouza)

* * * * *

How bizarre a book is *The Enemy At Home*, Dinesh D’Souza’s new screed
insisting the left is responsible for Islamic extremism? Pretty bizarre.
The book’s argument, [according to the
*Times*](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/06/books/06kaku.html?ex=1328418000&en=8b6559c4b74d4d22&ei=5090&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss)
is that “1) that the American left is allied to the Islamic radical
movement to undermine the Bush White House and American foreign policy;
and 2) that ‘the left is the primary reason for Islamic
anti-Americanism…’ because ‘liberals defend and promote values that are
controversial in America and deeply revolting to people in traditional
societies, especially in the Muslim world.’”

Follow that? The left is allies with Islamic extremists because the
extremists hate the left. Just like Dinesh D’Souza. “[W]hen it comes to
core beliefs,” he writes, “I’d have to confess that I’m closer to the
dignified fellow in the long robe and prayer beads than to the slovenly
fellow with the baseball cap [Michael Moore].”

In other words, it sounds like the right is allied with Islamic
extremists in hating the liberal elements of American culture. What to
do about this is left as an exercise to the reader.


Getting Past
============

February 8, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingpast)

* * * * *

He called me into his office. It was an imposing room, wood paneling and
a window opening on to a picturesque view of the water. An ornate light
fixture hung from the ceiling, illuminating the mahogany desk, neatly
organized with boxes OUT and IN, with a stack of paper, with a pad for
writing on. There was no computer. He didn’t need a computer. A computer
would have ruined the look.

The walls were lined with bookshelves and the bookshelves were lined
with management texts. Books on how to make people eat cheese, how to
make them say yes, how to make them think positive thoughts, how to make
them get rich. Books on locks and unlocking, thoughts and unthinking,
beings and unbeing.

“Take a seat, Geoffrey,” he said, looking at me from behind glasses, a
tailored suit hanging on his frame. I obeyed, as I always did. It was an
order.

“There’s been concern around the office,” he said. No agent. Not “people
are concerned”, not “I’m concerned”, simply that “there’s been concern”,
as if it was some poisonous gas that had been leaking out of my cubicle,
green fumes floating in mid-air.

“There’s been concern that you’re not being a team player.” A sports
metaphor. Here we are, all rocketing towards the goal, filing our TPS
reports in tandem, and me? I’m not being a team player. I’m sitting in
the corner playing Minesweeper or one of those online flash games with
the little jewels. The team’s let down. I’m holding everyone up.

“I think that the best way forward is for us to get past this,” he
explains. Isn’t that always the case? If we’re on a path, and there’s a
rock, then obviously we have to go past it to go forward. We could go a
different direction, but then we wouldn’t be going forward anymore. But
how did I become a rock?

“It’s clear to all of us,” he says. But who’s “us”? There’s only him
here. “It’s clear to all of us that your heart’s not in it.” I imagine
myself, lying on the surgery table, the bright light shining from above,
with an army of hims surrounding me; they’re the us. One of him asks
another for the scalpel, takes it, begins cutting out my still-beating
heart. Aha, they think, his heart’s not in it — it’s still in him.

They toss the heart in the trash and file out. They need to interview
another job candidate.


Our Underachieving College Presidents
=====================================

February 9, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/underbok)

* * * * *

[![Book cover](image1_underbok)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691125961)

It would seem absurd to claim that nobody cares about the quality of
higher education. After all, anyone paying attention can name a dozen
bestselling polemics off the top of their head — *The Closing of the
American Mind*, *The University in Ruins*, *Tenured Radicals*, *Higher
Superstitions*. But as Derek Bok points out in his quietly subversive
new book, *Our Underachieving Colleges*, these commentators have treated
universities largely as a punching bag for their political and
professional views, rather than out of any genuine concern for the
education of the students.

A classic example are the heated debates about what should be in the
core curriculum. Should the humanities be required? Should things be
focused around the great books? What about classes in writing and public
speaking? Professors will happily argue about the proper allocation of
required classes for hours, but you’ll never once hear them comment
about the *way* in which these classes are taught. And without decent
technique, it doesn’t matter what the topic of the class is.

Bok shows deep familiarity with a largely-hidden literature about the
effectiveness of college teaching. Nearly 80 percent of all college
courses are simply lectures by professors, a stunningly ineffective form
of teaching. By the end of a lecture, a student remembers less than half
of what was taught. Only a week later, that number is down to 20%. At
such stunning rates, it’s hard to imagine much is left after a month,
let alone by the time the student gets out of college.

And yet nobody seems to care one whit. Bok is hardly to be excepted from
this criticism. After the Larry Summers scandal, he was appointed acting
president of Harvard University (and before that he was president from
1971 to 1991). Bok expects to only have the job for a year and no doubt
his hands are tied in many ways — but rumor about campus is that he
wants to make his year count. Yet Bok’s biggest changes have been a
recommendation for more hands-on activities and the elimination of early
admissions. Not bad moves, by any means, but hardly anything like the
deep rethinking Bok’s book suggests is necessary.

But if Bok — a thoughtful and intelligent figure who has written
eloquently about these problems — can’t use his position — the most
prominent spot in the entire field, with the deadline already on his
head freeing him from any accountability — can’t do anything about these
problems, what hope do we possibly have? Opportunities like this come
around once a century and it appears that Bok is going to blow it.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691125961)


[image1_underbok]: image1_underbok.jpg

The Activist’s Creed
====================

February 11, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/activcreed)

* * * * *

> True, those who have abandoned the life of a free man do nothing but
> boast incessantly of the peace and repose they enjoy in their chains.
> But when I see the other sacrifice pleasures, repose, wealth, power
> and life itself for the preservation of this sole good, which is so
> disdained by those who have lost it, when I see multitudes of entirely
> naked savages scorn European voluptuousness and endure hunger, fire,
> the sword and death to preserve only their independence, I feel it
> does not behoove slaves to reason about freedom.

(Jean-Jacques Rousseau, *Second Treatise on Inequality*)


Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel
===================================================

February 12, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/godel)

* * * * *

[![Book cover](image1_godel)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393327604)

Gödel was a hacker. He attended the meetings of the Vienna Circle, one
of the most important philosophical groups in history, and sat quietly,
convinced they were all wrong. Others might try to argue them out of it.
Not Gödel. Perhaps (rightly) he thought that rational argument would get
him nowhere with people so detached from reality. So he decided to
*prove* them wrong.

The result was Gödel’s incompleteness theorem, one of the most
celebrated results in mathematics and logic, elegantly proving that any
mathematical system complicated enough to do basic arithmetic contains
statements which, while true, cannot be proven within the system.

But even this was to no avail, the Vienna Circle continued to insist the
proof was bogus or irrelevant. (The Vienna Circle insisted the world was
simply language-games, with rules and structures. Gödel, by showing
something that was clearly true to us but not provable from within the
game, thought he had proved that such things, like numbers, have an
independent reality.) Gödel, an incredibly odd and delusional figure,
remained quiet for many years, practically confiding only in Albert
Einstein, and little at all after Einstein’s death.

This is a very bad book. It rambles and prattles and occasionally
repeats itself practically verbatim. (It is the result of a project to
improve science writing simply by paying famous authors to write about
scientific topics. Perhaps the payment should be contingent on some
measure of quality in the result.) But it is a compelling story and
Gödel’s proof is so brilliantly beautiful that it should be learned by
all educated people. I had never seen it presented in any real detail
before and once I got to its key principle I exclaimed and tossed the
book down and paced, admiring its brilliance. But there are many sources
who will explain the fairly simple idea. I’d love to tell you about it
myself.

-   [Buy Goldstein’s book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393327604)
-   [Buy Raymond Smullyan’s explanation of the
    proof](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195046722)


[image1_godel]: image1_godel.jpg

It’s Faust!
===========

February 12, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/itsfaust)

* * * * *

In response to my post on [underachieving Harvard
presidents](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/underbok), Harvard has named
Drew Faust to be its new president (and the first woman).


Average People
==============

February 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/avgpeople)

* * * * *

College towns are funny. I’m sitting in a small cafe, reading my little
book, eating my little breakfast. I’m the only customer around and the
employees seem to have forgotten there’s even me, so they start gabbing
to themselves. The Mexican immigrant chef is chatting to the high school
dropout waitress. Pause here and ask yourself what these two people
might talk to each other about in their spare time. Try and think about
what you might talk to them about were you in such a situation. Now
recall that you’re in Cambridge, Massachusetts. They were talking, quite
animatedly, about the demographic trends for marriage under
European-style social democracy.

They quickly shut up when a girl walked in. “The usual?” asked the girl
behind the counter. “Yep,” said the girl coming in the door. The order
was prepared and delivered while the two girls chatted politely. Then
the girl took her food and left. “God, I hate her,” said the girl behind
the counter. “I don’t understand how an idiot like that goes to Tufts.
She doesn’t care anything about *ideas*.”

College towns are funny.

* * * * *

Recently, Seth Roberts and I have embarked on an odd little project.
We’ve gone to various colleges in the area and asked kids why they’re
there. The first day was at Berkeley and as I walked through Sproul
Plaza at noon, kids of every shape and description trying to push fliers
and come-ons in my face as I just tried to look around, I had a feeling
it wasn’t going to be easy.

Seth was wearing a tattered brown jacket and had a not-entirely-shaved
face and, to be honest, looked a little odd. So when he went up to
students and asked them if they had a minute, everyone said no. We went
through five or six awkward such rejections until we realized that he
should start off by saying he was a tenured professor at Berkeley.
Nobody said no after that; apparently people initially thought he was a
homeless person.

* * * * *

For right or wrong, I’d come to think of random people as boring. In
part, I think this is because I’m shy, and I feel less bad about my
inability to make conversation with strangers if I can persuade myself
that the conversation isn’t going to be worthwhile. After months of
trying to make my way through desultory conversations with other
Stanford students (“What are you studying?” “Oh, I don’t know yet. You?”
“I don’t know yet either.”) I finally gave up and spent the rest of my
time there with my nose in a book.

And part, perhaps, is that average people just have a really bad rap.
Books complain about the anti-intellectualism of American culture.
Professors complain about the students who don’t care about the work.
Newspapers complain about the ignorant red state-filling wingnuts. The
average person seems like a dangerous entity, like the fellow at the
lecture with the long and rambling not-quite-a-question that makes you
think that maybe elitism isn’t such a bad idea after all.

And who knows, maybe average people are actually like that. Maybe
college towns are funny.

* * * * *

We went to three colleges: Stanford, UC Berkeley, and Berkeley City
College. The colleges are quite different. Stanford is a large elite
school for people who want to become professionals. (I’d always heard
this from my teachers, that Stanford was a place of people who were
pre-med and pre-law and pre-grad school, but I wondered how big the
effect was. As I was sitting down to interview our first Stanford
subject, I wondered if we’d interview enough people to be able to notice
the difference. That’s when she explained that she was pre-med.)

UC Berkeley is a state school, although a respected one, with a large
campus, although mixed in with an interesting city. (Stanford is almost
literally surrounded by a moat.) And Berkeley City College is a junior
college, in an attractive new building in the middle of the city, full
of people who want to transfer out of there and into the real thing.

There were differences between the schools, of course, but more
noticeable was the basic fundamental similarities. Everyone we spoke to,
with one exception, was intelligent, articulate, had coherent thoughts
about their situation and its place in the larger context, and was
someone I enjoyed talking to. (The one exception was even more
thought-provoking and made me wonder what it meant to be intelligent and
why I felt so uncomfortable around him.)

Seth was much braver than I and took most of the brunt of the
conversation, leaving me to observe and reflect quietly. But even just
watching random conversations with random people was a thoroughly
rewarding experience. I felt as if it was some essential task of
humanity that I had heretofore neglected.

* * * * *

Everyone we interviewed stands out, but perhaps a few examples will give
you the flavor of people’s situations. There was the young man at
Stanford who had started a web-based business with his friends from high
school. He soon realized that they were in an overcompetitive market and
during his first year at Stanford had reconfigured their business plan
to target a new space. Meanwhile, he planned to take business classes to
get a more academic grounding in his profession.

There was the African-American girl at UC Berkeley who loved her courses
in African-American Studies, how they revealed a secret history of her
country that she’d never before heard told. She couldn’t see making a
living in the subject, of course, but she wanted to study it while she
could, before she had to find a real job. A job like, if she had to pick
right now, probably teaching.

There was the Berkeley City College student who had done three years of
college in Chile, spent a couple years in Germany, and now worked in
Berkeley as a professional dancer, hoping to get college credit so she
could get a job doing Latin American human rights work, ideally for the
UN.

* * * * *

I am not sure what to say to these people. I understand the paths their
lives are on and I see the flaws in the institutions in which they
reside, but I have trouble imagining how I can fix things for them, as
people. The problem with psychologists, sociologists complain, is that
they’re too obsessed with individual people. And the problem with focus
groups, even though they were invented by a sociologist, is that people
are too obsessed with themselves. They see their problems, they see the
context, and they reflect on them, but it’s not clear to either of us
how they can particularly be remedied. The situations are just too big.


God Is My Dungeonmaster
====================

February 16, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/godismydm)

* * * * *

[broken image](http://www.cafepress.com/godismydm)


Bandwagon
=========

February 17, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bandwagon)

* * * * *

A new service called [Bandwagon](http://ridethebandwagon.com/) is
launching soon that automatically backs up the music libraries of iTunes
users to Amazon S3 for a flat rate. It looks very cleanly-designed; if
only they did it [for your whole hard
drive](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lazybackup).

*Disclosure:* By posting this blog post, they’re giving me a free
one-year account.


Classism at Google
==================

February 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googclassism)

* * * * *

[From the comments:](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googlife#c169)

> MOST PEOPLE who work at Google are in SUPPORT roles!! And they are
> getting paid way less than industry standard for working 50, 60+ hours
> a week for it! Screw the free food, screw the laundry - the MAJORITY
> of people working at Google are in buildings without any of these
> amenities, and are certainly without extra money from stock options.
>
> […] they are the ones working their asses off, in overtime, but that
> doesn’t matter because they are salaried but way below industry
> standards for support positions, to make sure that YOU, the user, has
> an accessible Help Center, has a kind, email response, has an answer
> to your question.
>
> Yes, there are foosball tables in the support buildings, but who has
> time to play them? Giant overhead projectors alerting them to the
> current turnaround time for their emails is Big Brother enough to
> ensure that they don’t even THINK about playing foosball when they
> should be answering support emails. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner are
> not nice alternatives - they are NECESSARY to ensure that all of the
> support peons remain dutiful and consistent with their email
> turnaround times.
>
> Wow, sounds like they’re overworked. Can’t Google just hire more
> people? HAHAHAHAHAHA!!!!! For a response to that, please see the above
> comments. It’s as hard to get a support role here if you’re an MBA
> with a PhD as a hobby, as if you invented nuclear physics.
>
> I’ve been here almost 5 years, and as soon as my refresher grant has
> vested, I am out like Lance Bass. It’s a load of corporate baloney -
> the 400-person company that I started at has become a nightmare that
> has eaten my soul. God help the users.


Ode to a Blue Bicycle
=====================

March 11, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bluebike)

* * * * *

For the longest time, I treated my bicycle as an extension of myself. I
would strap on my helmet and jacket, fit myself into the seat, and
firmly attach my arms to the handle bars and go. From then on, I saw
myself as the bicycle. When I wanted to turn left, I’d rotate my arms
left and we’d all move left. I didn’t think of it as having the bike
move left and staying on the bike — I thought of it as moving left. The
bike was a part of me.

It’s the same way I think of a car. You buckle into your seatbelt and
suddenly you grow to become this huge hunk of metal that tears down the
road. Moving left or right is now done through the steering wheel, but
it still seems like you’re the one who’s doing the moving.

Body parts act kind of like our agents. When I want to raise my hand, I
simply think to do so and my hand flies up. I let the rest of my body
worry about the details. Similarly, when I want my bike to turn left I
simply rotate the handle and let it use its momentum to wheel me over.

But here’s the thing. I recently bought a nice, new, blue bike. And
something strange happened. I stopped seeing it as an extension of my
body, and started seeing it as just another tool. And suddenly riding it
became a lot more fun.

I didn’t have to stay attached to the bike all the time. I could keep
one foot on a pedal and swing the other one over. Or I could go left
while the bike went right, the two of us swinging back and forth in a
counterweight dance. Or I could let the bike go ahead of me or behind
me.

It seems counterintuitive that you’d get more out of a bike when you
started treating it as a tool. People speak in glowing terms of how
their cars act as extensions of their body, a perfect meld between mind
and machine. And maybe that makes sense for cars (they’re big and
confusing enough that there’s not much else you can do). But I think
this is another case of [the genius being in the
details](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smartabstractions). Once I saw
the bike as a bike, I could use it in ways that weren’t particularly
intended.


Reagan, Star Wars, and the End of the Cold War
==============================================

March 13, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intheblue)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_intheblue)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743200233)

It’s not hard to see why building technology to defend against nuclear
missiles is tricky. First, there’s the obvious difficulty of shooting at
a moving target — like a bullet shooting a bullet. Then there’s the fact
that whatever device is defending you must itself be well defended, or
else the enemy can simply take it out. And then there’s the nasty fact
that with nuclear war, near-perfect defense is necessary — even a single
failure can cause enormous damage.

What is hard is explaining why, despite this, so many people took the
idea so seriously. That’s the question Frances FitzGerald takes up in
*Way Out There In The Blue*, in which she uses the “Star Wars”
initiative as a prism with which to understand the Reagan
administration. Combined with Rick Perlstein’s forthcoming *Nixonland*,
the books provide allegorical insight into our current government: Bush
II has combined the criminality of Nixon with the intellectual emptiness
of Reagan.

Ronald Reagan was an actor. Even when off the set, he recited polished
lines and played up a well-practiced demeanor. Indeed, he appears to
have no inner life whatsoever. No one can be found to whom Ronald Reagan
ever “opened up”; even his wife commented that “There’s a wall around
him … even I feel that barrier.” As president, he was given the
equivalent of shooting instructions specifying exactly where he was
supposed to be every hour of the day and when he attended public events
toe marks were chalked on the ground to indicate where he should stand.

Considering the state of the American political system, having an actor
for a President is perhaps not the worst idea. But what was problematic
was that nobody — including Reagan’s closest aides — seemed to realize
that that was what they were getting. For months they were continually
shocked that Reagan refused to ever make a decision or take an action on
any issue whatsoever. Instead, they watched dumbly as he simply listened
to what he was told and nodded politely. When two of his subordinates
disagreed, he was uncomfortable, but he steadfastly refused to
intervene.

The result was that decisions ended up getting made by whoever was
around — Nancy Reagan, his wife; Michael Deaver, his aide in charge of
public relations; etc. Reagan’s top people, such as his cabinet
officials, frightened that they were actually making policy without any
supervision, kept this fact secret from their staffs and the public
until they all published their kiss-and-tell memoirs after Reagan had
left office. Even more shocking, Reagan didn’t seem to mind when the
members of this group changed. One day Reagan’s inner circle informed
him that they were leaving and bringing the Treasury Secretary in to
take their place. Reagan simply thanked them for their service.

There was one thing Reagan did seem to care about (aside from politely
answering his fan mail): speeches. Reagan would rewrite his own
speeches, removing abstract verbiage and adding homespun stories. And it
was out of this concern that he stumbled into launching the Star Wars
initiative.

After many years of right-wing propaganda about a “window of
vulnerability” in our arms race with the Soviet Union, the Pentagon
developed the MX missile series to ensure American superiority. The
problem was where to put them. The MX missiles were designed to protect
against the Soviets simply destroying all of our missiles, so they could
not simply be put out in the open or the Soviets would simply destroy
them as well. A variety of Rube Goldberg-like ideas were proposed to
solve the problem.

After a thorough investigation, the military concluded the best solution
was what came to be called “the racetrack”: the missiles would be put on
huge underground circular tracks, with little launching stations cut
sporadically in the track. There would be several times more launching
stations than missiles, so the Soviets would not know which stations to
attack. But, to verify compliance with arms treaties, the stations could
be opened so that the Soviets could see which ones contained missiles
from space.

The problem was that the racetracks would need to be huge and the only
practical space for such a thing was in Utah. The Mormon Church was
understandably unhappy about having a huge nuclear missile field being
built near them and thus the powerful Republicans from that region of
the country scuttled the plan.

Other ideas were tried — the racetrack was converted to a straight line
system, then to a configuration known as “Dense Pack” in which the
missiles were all placed close together, in the hopes that all the
missiles coming to attack them would blow each other up and perhaps
spare some of our missiles. Another plan, known as “Big Bird”, had the
missiles flying overhead on large transport planes, but it was scrapped
when technicians raised concerns about the wings falling off. Another
proposal involved hiding the missiles as normal luggage on cross-country
passenger trains. It got to the point where the best idea was literally
known as DUMB — deep underground missile basing — in which the missiles
would be loaded on corkscrews which would drill down underground.
Finally, they decided just to deploy the missiles in
superficially-hardened housing, even though this meant they could be
easily destroyed.

At the same time, a mass popular movement for a nuclear freeze was
growing, encompassing college students, churches, and many unpoliticized
citizens. Reagan’s credibility on foreign policy was slipping away while
books and movies and massive protests scared citizens into thinking
about the unthinkable prospect of a nuclear holocaust. The Democrats
were seizing power and mindshare and a nuclear freeze bill passed the
House. Clearly something had to be done.

Missile defense seemed like the perfect alternative. It didn’t require
any diplomatic changes or sacrificing any weapons development — indeed,
it allowed for more spending on research. But it allowed Reagan to use
the language of the doves — a sincere desire to rid the world of the
scourge of nuclear war. So when a Reagan aide proposed the idea (which
the aide conceived of as a chip to be bargained away for with the
Soviets), Reagan seized upon the idea and worked it into a speech at the
next available opportunity.

There was just one problem: nobody had any idea how to make it work. The
most prominent right-wing scientist, Edward Teller, was very excited
about a new technology in which a high-powered X-ray could be sent along
a rod to vaporize small objects. Teller proposed a large satellite with
such rods sticking out of it, a device that came to be known as the
“space-based sea urchin”. What happens when the Soviets target the
defense? he was asked. Teller didn’t seem to have considered the
question but, unfazed, came back the next day suggesting the defense
weapons be stored underwater and “pop up” when missiles were overhead.

Such debates disguised the fact that no actual missile defense
technology existed or was likely to for a long, long time. Tactics and
costs for disintegration rays and sea urchins could be discussed
endlessly, but such discussion was irrelevant, as nobody knew how to
build the key components. But this fact was carefully kept from
politicians and the press who, ignorant of the science, continued to
discuss missile defense as if it was a serious proposal. Thus, a
majority of Americans were convinced that scientific ingenuity would
find a way to protect the country — indeed, they believed it already
had.

But the sheen of a someday-to-be-developed missile defense system could
not last forever — Reagan needed something more repeatable to boost his
flagging poll numbers, especially in the wake of such scandals as
Iran-contra. The result was an ongoing series of carefully-spun summits
with the Soviets, in which the President claimed to be making good
progress on negotiations for arms reduction. (That negotiated arms
reduction could serve as a replacement for a missile defense initiative
never seemed to occur to the Reagan administration; it was not exactly a
group prone to analytical self-reflection.)

On the Russian side, Mikhail Gorbachev, a brilliant and daring new
politician, had come to power. Gorbachev seemed more like an American
figure than a Russian one — he spoke plainly, made daring moves toward
peace, and played well for the cameras. For much of the following years,
Gorbachev had higher poll numbers in the US than Reagan did. Washington
was said to have been swept away with “Gorby fever” and “Gorbymania”.

Gorbachev unilaterally made a series of striking reforms in both
domestic and foreign policy. He offered the US a wide variety of
concessions in disarmament talks, insisting only that the US stop the
SDI program (the one principle which Reagan refused to concede). Then he
begun the process of glasnost, increasing the freedom of the press and
allowing a left-wing reform movement to develop. As part of this, he
freed dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov, who proceeded to tell the
media that SDI was a bluff that the US could never successfully develop.
Shortly thereafter, Gorbachev was even willing to budge on that,
allowing the US to continue SDI. Meanwhile, he begun the process of
perestroika, reforming the Russian political and economic system to
increase the scope of democracy.

Meanwhile, Reagan’s side continued to bungle or misunderstand all of
Gorbachev’s moves, using his disarmament proposals for little more than
PR victories at home and continuing to insist his reforms were merely
cosmetic attempts to prop up the old system. Reagan and Gorbachev
continued to hold summits with plentiful photo opportunities, but little
in the way of actual agreement was ever reached.

Indeed, Reagan actually made Gorbachev’s reforms much more difficult by
doing things like giving speeches demanding the General Secretary “tear
down this wall”. Such speeches only lent credence to the conservatives
who charged that Gorbachev was simply doing the West’s dirty work from
the inside.

Yet despite Reagan’s ineptitude, Gorbachev’s reforms took hold — perhaps
even more strongly than he had intended — and the old Soviet system
began to fall apart. Democratic parties were elected, troops were
withdrawn, and the wall finally came down.

But Americans were reluctant to believe that the destruction of the
Soviet system had come from the reformers within it. Instead, they
retrospectively lionized Reagan as the man whose tough talk had made the
system come apart.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743200233)


[image1_intheblue]: image1_intheblue.jpg

Why You Shop At Wal-Mart: Economics Eats Itself
===============================================

March 13, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nobodyshops)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_nobodyshops)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/189707106X)

There is a theory (quite an elegant one, actually) that says that
because we live in a marketplace of free choices we end up getting
basically what we want — our dollars are like votes for the society we
wish to live in. Many have challenged this view, from a variety of
perspectives, but Tom Slee (who calls this notion MarketThink) has
chosen to focus on just one: the economic subfield of “game theory”.

In his elegant little book, the poorly-titled *No One Makes You Shop At
Wal-Mart*, Slee walks through the major discoveries of game theory,
explains them in simple language with reference to a fictional town of
Whimsley, and discusses how they refute standard economic conclusions
while still playing by basic economic assumptions with effects that
appear to show up in the real world.

Take the problem of littering, for example. The town of Whimsley has a
large park between its coffee shop and its office building. Residents
can toss their empty coffee cups on the ground in the park, thereby
saving themselves the trouble of carrying it but minutely spoiling the
park, or they can carry it to the trash at the office, saving the park
but bothering their hands. In the absence of anyone else, each resident
is better off tossing their cup — the bother of carrying it is much more
than the small amount of spoilage. But if everyone does this, the park
is quickly full of litter. Each individual, acting perfectly rationally,
creates a situation that none of them want.

A similar problem gives the book its title. Imagine you get some utility
from having a vibrant downtown of independent shops. Then a Wal-Mart
opens up on the outskirts of town. You begin shopping at the Wal-Mart
because the prices are cheaper and you can still walk through the
vibrant downtown when you like. But with everyone buying things at
Wal-Mart, the downtown stores can no longer afford to stay open and the
center of your city turns into an empty husk. You’d prefer to have the
vibrant downtown to the Wal-Mart, but nobody ever gave you that choice.

The book is full of dozens of examples like this, each with careful
analysis and clear writing. Perhaps the most odd feature of the book is
its politics. On the one hand, Slee is plainly a committed leftist, with
positive references to Naomi Klein and other capitalist critics. But on
the other hand, he never gives up on the rational actor and
methodological individualist assumptions of modern economics, and shows
little patience for those (typically his political allies) who have more
thorough-going critiques. Nonetheless, the book is a recommended read
for anyone interested in these questions.

**Online Bonus:** Watch Tom Slee [eviscerate Chris Anderson’s
inbox-stuffer, *The Long
Tail*](http://whimsley.typepad.com/whimsley/2007/03/the_long_tail_l.html)
on his weblog, Whimsley. Because, remember folks, “Abundance, like
growth itself, is a force that is changing our world in ways that we
experience every day, whether we have an equation to describe it or
not.” (p. 146)

[image1_nobodyshops]: image1_nobodyshops.jpg

Hating John Searle
==================

March 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/searle)

* * * * *

I think John Searle might be my favorite living philosopher. But when I
tell my friends this, they recoil in horror. “That bastard?” one friend
cries. “He [tripled my
rent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Searle#The_landlord_and_the_city_government)!”
“Oh geebus,” another cries. “The Chinese Room argument is *awful*.”

I will not profess to have an opinion on whether the fourteenth
amendment requires the City of Berkeley to provide a rational basis for
only allowing its landlords to raise rents at forty percent of the
increase in the consumer price index, but I must admit I fail to see
what the question has to do with Searle as a philosopher.

The other complaint seems less *ad hominem*, but I think is
fundamentally similar. Reading Searle’s published books, it’s striking
how little space the Chinese Room Argument takes up. Indeed, his book on
the subject of consciousness — *The Rediscovery of the Mind* — gives it
little more than a paragraph and notes that his more recent argument
against functionalism is far more powerful.

Nonetheless, I will defend the Chinese Room Argument. The basic idea,
for those who aren’t familiar with it, is this: imagine yourself being
placed in a room and given instructions on how to convert one set of
Chinese symbols to another. To outsiders, if the instructions are good
enough, it will seem as if you understand Chinese. But you do not
consciously understand Chinese — you are simply following instructions.
Thus, no computer can ever consciously understand Chinese, because no
computer does more than what you’re doing — it’s simply following a set
of instructions. (Indeed, being unconscious, it’s doing far less.)

The Chinese Room Argument works mainly as a forcing maneuver. There are
only two ways out of it: you can either claim that no one is conscious
or that everything is conscious. If you claim that no one is conscious,
then there is no problem. Sure, the man doesn’t consciously understand
Chinese, but he doesn’t consciously understand English either. However,
I don’t think anyone can take this position with a straight face. (Even
Daniel Dennett is embarrassed to admit it in public.)

The alternative is to say that while perhaps the man doesn’t consciously
understand Chinese, the *room* does. (This is functionalism.) I think
it’s pretty patently absurd, but Searle provides a convincing
refutation. Functionalists argue that information processes lead to
consciousness. Running a certain computer program, whether on a PC or by
a man with a book or by beer cups and ping pong balls, will cause that
program to be conscious. Searle points out that this is impossible;
information processes can’t cause consciousness because they’re not
brute facts. We (conscious humans) look at something and decide to
*interpret* it as an information process; but such processes don’t exist
in the world and thus can’t have causal powers.

* * * * *

Despite the obvious weakness of the arguments, why do so many of my
friends continue to believe in functionalism? The first thing to notice
is that most of my friends are computer programmers. There’s something
about computer programming that gets you thinking that the brain is
nothing more than a special kind of program.

But once you do that, you’re stuck. Because one property of computer
programs is that they can run on any sort of hardware. The same program
can run on your Mac or a PC or a series of gears and pulleys. Which
means it must be the program that’s important; the hardware can’t be
relevant. Which is patently absurd.

I used to think that part of the reason my friends believed this was
because they had no good alternatives. But I’ve since explained to them
Searle’s alternative — consciousness is a natural phenomenon which
developed through evolutionary processes and is caused by the actions of
the brain in the same way solidity is caused by the actions of atoms —
and it hasn’t caused them to abandon their position one bit.

So I tried a different tack. I asked them what they thought was wrong
with Searle’s position. And the answer always seems to come down to a
confusion between ontology and epistemology. Ontology is a fancy word
for the facts of the matter — what actually exists out in the world. And
epistemology is the world for the way we know about it. Unless you
subscribe to a bizarre philosophical theory, things in the world exist
irrespective of whether we know them or not. Behind the TV game show
door, there either is a car or there isn’t, even if no one can see in to
tell which one is the case. Furthermore, things continue to exist even
if we can’t even know them in principle. There appears to be no way for
me to ever tell what it feels like for you to taste an orange;
nonetheless, there is indeed something that it feels like for you.

My programmer friends’ argument always ends up coming down to this: if a
computer program acted conscious, if it plaintively insisted that it was
conscious, if it acted in all respects like the conscious people we know
in the real world, then it must be conscious. How could we possibly tell
if it was not? In short, they believe in the Turing Test as a test for
consciousness — anything that acts smart enough to make us think it’s
conscious must be conscious.

This was the position Ned Block was trying to refute when he postulated
a computer program known as Blockhead. Blockhead is a very simple
(although very large) computer program. It simply contains a list of all
possible thirty minute conversations. When you say something, Blockhead
looks it up in the list, and says whatever the list says it’s supposed
to say next. (Obviously such a list would be unreasonably long in
practice, perhaps even when heavily compressed, but let us play along
theoretically.)

Having a conversation with Blockhead would be just like having a
conversation with a real person. But nobody could seriously claim the
program was conscious, right? Well, in fact they do.

One wonders whether these people think their cell phones are conscious.
After all, talking to a properly-enabled cell phone works just like
talking to a properly-enabled person! (I asked one friend this and his
response was that the whole system containing the cell phone and the
wires and the person on the other end was conscious.)

The point is that we don’t assign consciousness purely based on
behavior. Blockhead acts like it’s conscious and a completely paralyzed
person acts like they’re not, yet we all know that the first isn’t
conscious and the second is. Instead, we assign consciousness based on
causes. We know dogs are conscious because we know they have brains that
are very much like ours which cause behavior very much like ours. We
don’t make that judgment based on behavior alone.

* * * * *

Criticisms aside, what is the positive argument for John Searle? First,
he has done important work in a wide variety of fields. As far as I can
tell, he began following up the works of his teachers (like J. L.
Austin) on the topic of speech acts, which he generalized to the subject
of intentionality, which he solved by saying it was a property of
conscious beings, which led him to develop a theory of consciousness.
Second, all of his points seem quite reasonable to me and (with a few
exceptions) I agree with them. Third, he writes extremely clearly and
entertainingly and for a popular audience.

These three seem like a fairly low bar — they’re about what I would
expect from myself were I a philosopher — but its shocking how few
prominent philosophers seem to meet them. Daniel Dennett is a dreadfully
prolix writer and is insane. Thomas Nagel comes close but is a fairly
committed dualist. Hilary Putnam doesn’t write for a popular audience.
Peter Singer doesn’t seem to develop any actual theories. So I can’t
think of any. Can you? Suggestions appreciated in the comments.


Write Web Works With Me!
========================

March 16, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/soc2007)

* * * * *

Are you a student? Looking for a summer job? Here’s the deal: We come up
with an idea. You spend the summer implementing it. Google pays you
\$4500. The code gets released as free software. It’s called [Summer of
Code](http://code.google.com/soc/).

Me and others on the web.py mailing list have [drawn up a list of
potential project ideas](http://webpy.infogami.com/ideas). My personal
favorites are the stats package, where you implement a decent log
analysis package for web applications; a task I think both exciting, not
too hard, and long overdue, and “teh communicator”, where you use Ajax
push to build a web app that combines the best features of IRC and
mailing lists. But feel free to come up with your own if you think you
have some good ideas. (Or ask me if you have questions about mine.)

Once you’ve got something that seems appealing, [fill out the
application
form](http://groups.google.com/group/google-summer-of-code-announce/web/guide-to-the-gsoc-web-app-for-student-applicants).
Describe the project you’re interested in working on and set the
organization to “Python Software Foundation”. Then feel free to send me
an email introducing yourself and letting me know about your
application. Applications are due next week, so you might want to hurry.

Once the applications are in, me and the other mentors will be looking
through them and deciding which ones to accept. So it’s in your best
interest to make the application sound compelling and you sound
competent.

And spread the word!


How Quantum Mechanics is Compatible with Free Will
==================================================

March 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/quantumwill)

* * * * *

The actions of almost everything in this world are causally determined
by the state of the world that precedes them. Once you start a machine,
if no one touches it, its behavior can be predicted entirely in advance
from the laws of physics. When you drop a pen down a well, it is
physically necessary that it fall.

But our behavior doesn’t feel that way. When we stick out our tongue it
feels as if we had to specifically choose to stick it out, that this was
our own action and not a predetermined consequence of the existing state
of the world.

Some people argue that because the evidence for determinism is so
overwhelming, free will must simply be an illusion. But if so, it is a
very odd kind of illusion. Most illusions result from a naive
interpretation of our senses. For example, in a classic illusion, two
drawings of equal size appear to be of different size. But when we are
told this is an illusion, we can correct for it, and behave under the
new (more accurate) impression that the drawings are in fact of equal
size.

This simply isn’t possible with free will. If someone tells you that you
do not actually have free will but have actually been acting under an
illusion, you cannot sit back and let determinism take over. When the
waiter asks you whether you like soup or salad, you cannot say “Oh, well
I’ve just learned that free will is an illusion and all my actions are
completely determined by the previous state of the world, so I’ll just
let them play themselves out.” I mean, you can say that, but the waiter
will look at you like you’re crazy and you will get neither soup nor
salad.

It seems overwhelmingly bizarre that evolution would have given us this
strangest of illusions. This is not a spandrel, a small place evolution
never had time to be concerned about. The illusion of free will affects
all aspects of our lives and takes an enormous amount of work. One would
think evolution would have eliminated it were it genuinely false.

So what is the other possibility? The other possibility is that not all
actions are entirely determined by the preexisting state of the world.
And, in fact, recent advances in physics seem to show this is somewhat
the case. Quantum mechanics suggests that at some fundamental level
there is randomness involved in the laws of the world. And chaos theory
shows us that small amounts of randomness in a system can have real
large-scale effects.

So, although it seems extremely improbable, if we have to avoid the
improbability of evolution not breeding out an illusory free will, then
we’re forced to look to the randomness of quantum mechanics for an
explanation.

But, some argue, this is insufficient. Quantum mechanics only gives us
randomness — but free will isn’t just the pursuit of random behavior,
it’s the pursuit of particular behaviors. While quantum mechanics can’t
predict each individual bit, it does give overall probability
distributions. Volitional behaviors would wreak havoc with those even
distributions.

Not true. Imagine the simple case where we have one quantum bitstream: a
series of zeroes and ones, in which each individual number cannot be
predicted, but there’s an overall law saying that roughly half of them
will be one and half will be zero. And let us simplify the system to say
that if the result of the quantum effect is 0 then the person moves
left, and if it’s 1 they move right. In the naive scenario, free will
affects this quantum bitstream so that when the person wants to move
left the randomness keeps coming up zeroes. But that would violate the
laws of physics — the results would no longer be half ones and half
zeroes.

So here’s the trick: first, the system gets a random bit from some other
source. Then it adds the bit from the other source with the bit from the
quantum bitstream and uses the result to decide if you move left or
right. Now, when you want to continually move left, half the time you’ll
have to make the quantum bitstream return zeroes and the other half the
time ones — exactly what the laws of quantum mechanics require.

With a little additional mathematical complexity, the scenario is
generalizable to much more complicated quantum functions and human
results. But the basic principle is the same: one can use quantum
randomness to exercise free will without violating any statistical laws.

Of course, this still leaves one key problem. What is picking the
results of this quantum bitstream? And how does it do it? I have to
admit I cannot really think of a sensible way. But this seems like a
problem for neurobiology to figure out and report back to us. I merely
aim to prove that its doing so is consistent with what we know about the
laws of physics.


This Television Life
====================

March 23, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/taltv)

* * * * *

Have you ever listened to that show on NPR, *This American Life*? I
don’t know about you, but as far as I’m concerned, it has to be one of
the most amazing things to ever grace our country’s airwaves. Back when
it started, over a decade ago now, it was unlike just about anything you
heard on public radio. This wasn’t a show about news or music or comedy.
It wasn’t even, really, a show about people. It was a show about
stories, stripped down to their pure essence, people talking to you with
a little bit of music in the background.

Humans seem to have a natural craving for stories. Whatever the topic,
it’s more fun to hear a story about it. Everyone tells stories. Everyone
tells stories, but some people love crafting them until they’re perfect,
like little pastries of information with curves in all the right places.
And that’s what *This American Life* did each week on the radio: it
presented three or four perfectly-crafted stories, all tangentially
related to one loose theme, to your car or home for one full hour.

A couple years ago the Showtime network called Ira Glass, the head and
host of *This American Life* and asked him if he wanted to make a
television version of his show. For most people, getting a call from a
television network would be a fairly big deal. But not Glass. Every
week, his radio show is heard by 1.6 million people. A hit show on
Showtime gets half a million. So Glass said no, there was no way their
show would work on television. Still, Showtime persisted, asking what it
would take to make it work. So Glass thought of every crazy demand that
came to mind. And Showtime met them all.

The result, which premieres tonight on the pay-cable Showtime network,
has to be one of the most amazing things to grace American television.
It is unlike just about anything you’ve ever seen on TV. The best way I
can think to describe it is this: Have you ever seen one of those stock
photo movies? You know, the kind with the lusciously oversaturated
colors, weird landscapes, and slow-motion movements? The kind of footage
that makes the normal world look magical? Now, take that, and imagine an
entire television show made out of it. It’s absolutely incredible.

To promote the show, since Showtime isn’t exactly, *This American Life*
went on a six-city tour. I caught them in Chicago, where a jam-packed
crowd of dedicated fans (still pissed about the team moving to New York
to film the TV show) came to hear “What I Learned From Television”. We
were in the Chicago Theater, a local landmark that holds thousands. And,
I have to say, it’s probably the most fun I’ve ever had in a theater.

You know how on the radio show, they do these incredibly moving stories
that just send chills of emotion down your spine. Now imagine listening
to that, in the middle of a crowd of thousands of people who all came
out to hear the very same thing. I mean, these were people who cheered
individual names in the credits at the end of the show. (We’ll miss you
Elizabeth Meister!) I’ve never felt a room so charged with emotion
before.

So do these guys a favor. Do yourself a favor. Take your Nielsen box and
switch it to Showtime tonight at 10:30. It’ll be like nothing you’ve
ever felt before.

-   [Watch a low-res version on Showtime’s web
    site](http://www.sho.com/site/thisamericanlife/video.do)
-   [Download a high-res
    torrent](http://tvtorrents.com/loggedin/torrent.do?info_hash=fd097a2c5aa47ec38420931201c58013b67fabff)



Newspeak™
=========

March 25, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newspeaktm)

* * * * *

It started way back in the eighties, with the Stay Free maxi-pads. At
least, that’s what they said on this TV documentary I saw once. How
could you tell people to protect their freedom when they thought you
were talking about feminine hygiene products? I mean, you still had the
words, of course, it wasn’t Orwellian or anything, they didn’t take away
the words, they just “added” new meanings to them. Particular kinds of
meanings. And who really wanted to use them after that? It made the
whole idea of freedom seem kind of dirty.

We don’t have freedom either, of course. Freedom lasted a little longer,
before finally dying out in the late nineties when the name was taken by
that pornography download software. I mean, try telling some guy in the
street you’re just trying to protect your freedom. I’ve tried! He laughs
and then he makes some sort of obscene sexual pantomime. Makes it kind
of hard to be an activist.

Activist took a little longer. Companies bought out the core concepts
before they moved to the little stuff like us activists. Activist was
what they called it when they privatized the sewer system in the late
2000s. “Activists are shit,” you used to hear the right-wingers say. Now
they don’t even need to say it — it’s in the dictionary.

So when I recruit kids I can’t tell them what they’d be. Saying they’d
be activists is straight out, obviously. But I can’t even tell them we
do protests. Protest is what they call it when you call AAA when your
car breaks down. Kids don’t want to go around fixing broken cars.
They’re not big on protests.

Liberty quickly became the leading brand of thong underwear. Control is
the \#2 online role-playing game. Rights are the new name for gift
certificates. Democracy is the kind of M&Ms where you get to pick the
color. (“Geez man, we all like chocolate, but you’re taking things a bit
too far,” is what the kids say when I tell them we need to fight to
protect democracy.)

It’s like a nightmare version of *Intelligence* (or, as it used to be
called, *Wheel of Fortune*). They bought up all my words.


The Secret Behind The Secret
============================

March 26, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thesecretsecret)

* * * * *

The \#1 bestselling book in America is a 216-page volume called *The
Secret*, based on a DVD of the same title. “Truly life-changing
information,” exclaims the publisher on Amazon.com. “A new era for
humankind,” exults the web site. “This is The Secret to everything — the
secret to unlimited joy, health, money, relationships, love, youth:
everything you have ever wanted. […] [It] utterly transformed the lives
of every person who ever knew it… Plato, Newton, Carnegie, Beethoven,
Shakespeare, Einstein.”

What is this incredible secret? Namely, that the universe is governed by
a heretofore unknown Law of Attraction, as yet undiscovered by
conventional physicists, that the world rearranges itself to conform to
your thoughts. Or, as one proponent put it, the universe “is akin to a
big mail-order department,” in which you “‘order’ what you get by
sending energetic messages out to the universe.”

This stuff is so blatantly absurd that it’s not really worth debunking.
And it’s silly enough that [Barbara Ehrenreich has already written the
definitive
mockery](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B00E5DF113CF937A2575BC0A9639C8B63&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all)
(“Thoughts exert a gravitational-type force on the world, so that
‘whenever you think something, the thought immediately attracts its
physical equivalent.’ If you think money — in a totally urgent, focused
and positive way, of course — it will come flying into your pockets.”).
[Twice](http://ehrenreich.blogs.com/barbaras_blog/2007/02/the_secret_of_m.html)
(“I don’t have to write this blog, I can simply visualize it already
written — or could, if I’d bothered to read the whole book and finish
the DVD.”)

But, drawing on some of Ehrenreich’s other work, I’d like to discuss
they *why* of this book. The book’s success is easy enough to explain.
As [the Canadian publisher put
it](http://www.thestar.com/article/193263) in an interview with the
*Toronto Star*, “Basically, human beings are lazy. If you tell them you
can get rich just by thinking about it, obviously, they’re going to buy
it.”

But these books also have a more insidious effect. As Ehrenreich notes,
by making your lack of wealth and a good job into personal problems, you
discourage people from looking at the social systems that created and
sustained those problems. By telling them their thoughts control the
universe, you can persuade them to do things like — as one
Secret-endorsing book encouraged — “Place your hand on your heart and
say … ‘I admire rich people!’ ‘I bless rich people!’ ‘I love rich
people!’ ‘And I’m going to be one of those rich people too!’”

And, in reverse, by telling people that bad things are caused by their
negative thoughts, you get to persuade them to stop thinking about bad
things. “I’m a really big believer in The Secret,” a young black woman
recently explained at a Secret-related book reading. “But I also believe
that discrimination and racism are real. How can you harmonize those
things?”

“You just said you believe in discrimination,” explained the guru. “You
be-*live* it. I’m going to ask you to stop believing it, because if you
focus on the negative, you project it yourself.”

That’s right — if you stop believing in the existence of discrimination,
it’ll stop happening to you. No need to fight to end it! Those black
people banned from lunch counters in the South? They weren’t simply
believing hard enough. Those studies showing that resumes with
black-sounding names on them received far fewer callbacks as identical
ones with white-sounding names? The researchers didn’t take into account
their thoughtwaves.

Following this idea goes to some pretty dark places and the authors take
it all the way. “I really love what you’re doing,” said a young man at
the same event. “But how, for example, was 9/11 attracted to the people
in those buildings? That’s something I can’t understand.”

“Sometimes, we experience the law of attraction collectively,” explains
the guru. “The US maybe had a fear of being attacked. Those 3,000 people
— they might have put out some kind of fear that attracted this to
happen, fear of dying young, fear that something might happen that day.
But sometimes, it is collective.”

When you manage to convince people that even getting murdered is their
own fault, you’ve truly found the secret of success. For the already
powerful, that is.


Aaron’s Patented Demotivational Seminar
=======================================

March 27, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/demotivate)

* * * * *

Thousands of people out there are willing to give you a motivational
seminar, but only Aaron’s Patented Demotivational Seminars are going to
actually admit they demotivate you. I’ve collected thousands of actual
facts from real scientists and the verdict is in: people don’t matter,
except for a couple of rare exceptions, and you’re not one of them.
Sorry.

Let’s start at the beginning, shall we? The universe is a bunch of
random particles shooting through space following a handful of simple
laws. Through completely random and unintentional properties, some of
those particles bounced together to form you. But, I swear, it was a
total accident. They didn’t even realize they were doing it at the time
and if they knew they’d probably feel kind of guilty about it.

For a long time, it was pretty clear that most people didn’t matter. The
average person didn’t leave their town or village and so only interacted
with a small handful of people who lived near them, most of whom found
them annoying. The Internet has changed all that. Now the average person
doesn’t leave their computer and so only interacts with a small handful
of spammers who read their LiveJournal, most of whom find them annoying.
Luckily for posterity, their LiveJournal will probably disappear within
their lifetime due to a hard drive crash or some other kind of poor
server maintenance.

But let’s say you want to make a difference in the world. You can learn
a skill and go into a profession, where you get bossed around and told
exactly what to do by people more powerful than you. (Obeying them is
called “professionalism”.) It’s completely futile; had you not gone into
the professional (or if you decide to disobey orders) they would have
found someone else to do the exact same thing.

The same is true even if you’re the one giving orders. Imagine about the
most powerful job you can think of. Let’s say you’re a US Supreme Court
Justice, able to change the laws of the world’s only superpower with the
stroke of your pen. Well, big deal. Had you not been appointed to the
Supreme Court the President who appointed you would have found some
other judge who would have made the same changes to the law. Yeah, you
get to wear a robe and feel powerful, but when you look at the cold,
hard, scientific facts, you’re not making a lick of difference in the
world.

Want to actually make a difference? You’ll have to buck the system
instead of joining it.


John Hockenberry on Reporting the War at NBC
============================================

March 28, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hockenberry)

* * * * *

John Hockenberry is a long-time, well-known American journalist. He’s
won four Emmy awards and three Peabody awards. Now that, as he puts it,
“mainstream media doesn’t want John Hockenberry anymore,” he’s become a
Distinguished Fellow at the MIT Media Lab, where [he recently gave a
talk](http://www.media.mit.edu/events/eventpage.php?event=talk-398)
which commented on some of his experiences covering the Iraq war while
at NBC.

Here are some excerpts:

> I was very happily employed at NBC. I wasn’t like, running around,
> trying to stuff toilet paper into the plumbing and sabotage the place.
> […] But I was interested, because we had a lot of meetings at NBC
> about, you know, if you’re doing a story and the person you’re doing
> the story about offers to buy you a drink, you’ve gotta say no. If
> you’re doing a story and they send you, after they see the story, some
> napkin rings — silver napkin rings that are monogrammed “Thank you,
> Jon, for the story,” you’ve got not only to return those, you’ve got
> to report those to the standards people at NBC because there’s a whole
> ethics and conflict-of-interest thing.
>
> So at one of these ethics meetings — I called them the
> return-the-napkin-ring kinds of meetings — I raised my hand and said
> “You know, isn’t it a problem that the contract that GE has with the
> Coalition Provisional Authority […] to rebuild the power generation
> system in Iraq [is] about the size of *the entire budget of NBC*? Is
> that kind of like the napkin rings thing?” And the standards people
> said “Huh. That’s interesting. No one’s brought that up before.” Now
> I’m not saying that I’m smart or that I’m advanced or that I’m ahead
> of my colleagues or maybe I had a lot of free time to think about this
> or maybe I’m some pinko-proto-lefty like Richard Nixon. I don’t know!
> But the fact that it drew a complete blank among the NBC standards
> people was interesting to me.
>
> [Now] in fact what happens in the networks — and you can find this at
> ABC and other networks at well — is that this [conflict with the
> profit motive] manifests itself [as journalists saying] “Well, we are
> better reporters because we deal with these kinds of conflicts all the
> time. And because we deal with those and we *always* decide in favor
> of the audience, it sort of exercises our journalistic muscle.” And
> this is the line you get from all of the entities.
>
> You may or may not be aware that there was a real strong full-court
> press to sell the media — and I’m not pro- or against it at this
> particular point, but there was a process in place where individuals
> in the media got access to the individuals involved in the planning of
> the war. There were generals who came in, there were former
> secretaries of defense, Schwarzkopf spent a whole lot of time giving
> sort of off-the-record, quiet briefings. And the generals would sort
> of bring in a certain group of editors and reporters and I went to all
> of these briefings.

At one of them, Hockenberry explains, a well-known pollster told about a
briefing he gave to all the senior officials at the White House about
how the polling data from the Arab world showed that America’s negatives
were simply off-the-charts. Everyone was quiet. Condi asked a few
technical questions and then finally Karl Rove spoke up. “Well, that’s
just until we start throwing our weight around over there,” he said.

Hockenberry was stunned and thought they should do a piece on what this
revealed into the mentality of the war’s planners. But NBC News didn’t
think this was a very good idea. America wanted the war to happen; their
job was just to wait and see how it turned out. “We’re not particularly
interested in the story,” Hockenberry explains. “We’re a process that’s
trying to maintain people in front of the set, so in a certain sense
media at that point was doing its own kind of shock-and-awe that went
right along with the war’s shock-and-awe [because] the business is just
to grab eyeballs.”

Later, his team edited together a montage of clips about what it was
like for reporters who were still in Iraq to experience the
shock-and-awe campaign. Vibrant images, narrated by a tense reporter who
was on the ground at the time.

> We played this piece for the editors. And it was very moving, very
> powerful, and it was a very different perspective from what we were
> getting. And at the end […] there was quiet around the table, because
> it was kind of an emotional piece and certainly the emotion in this
> reporter’s voice was detectable over a satellite phone line.
>
> And the standards person goes — and again, this is his job, I don’t
> begrudge him that — he goes, “Seems like, seems like she has a point
> of view here.”
>
> The table was silent. Just dead silent. And I was infuriated. But
> whenever I get this sort of infuriated feeling I think “You know, this
> is a career-ending moment here.” There is something I could say that
> would be right. There is something I could say that would be wrong.
> And there is something that I could say that would be right — and also
> would be wrong.
>
> And it was the beginning of the coverage of an event that would be
> extraordinary and I definitely wanted to be around to be a part of the
> next day’s coverage, but I had to say something. And it seemed as
> though, if nobody said anything, people would go “well, I guess we’ll
> have to tone her down.”
>
> So I said, “You mean, the war-is-bad point of view?”

The piece aired.


Everything Good is Bad For You
==============================

March 29, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/everythinggood)

* * * * *

While we were developing Reddit, we always used to run into people who’d
recognize us and come up to say hi. “Oh, wow,” they’d say to us. “I
can’t tell you how much your site has killed my productivity. I check it
a hundred times every day.” At first, we just laughed these comments
off. But after a while, I begun to find them increasingly disturbing.
We’d set out to make something people want — but what if they didn’t
want to want it?

For too long, simple popularity has been the only metric of a startup’s
success. Another startup, known as Twitter, has recently broken into the
mainstream. And I constantly hear people saying things like “Yeah, well,
I know it seems like a pointless waste of time. But it’s so *popular*!”
As if anything so popular had to be worthwhile.

Cory Doctorow recently [made a similar
argument](http://www.locusmag.com/Features/2007/03/cory-doctorow-you-do-like-reading-off.html).
When he publishes his books online, he notes, people are always telling
him they don’t like reading off a screen. And yet, these very same
people spend every free hour of the day reading email and weblogs and
news articles off a screen. “It’s like watching someone shovel Mars Bars
into his gob while telling you how much he hates chocolate,” Doctorow
complains. Doctorow’s conclusion? Blogs are just better.

But I think Mars Bars are just the right analogy. Everyone in America
knows that it’s easy to accidentally find yourself stuffing your face
with junk food when you’re not paying attention. But no one would
seriously maintain that junk food is better than fine cuisine. It’s just
*easier*.

Similarly, if you printed out all the blog posts and news articles and
emails the average timewaster reads in a month and placed the resulting
hulking volume down next to a copy of, say, *War and Peace* (which it
would no doubt dwarf), it’s hard to imagine the average person saying
they’d actually prefer to sit down and read the first. (If *War and
Peace* doesn’t strike your fancy, substitute a similarly large tome.)
But reading bite-sized blog posts is by far *easier*.

The same goes for reading stories on Reddit or your friends’ pointless
twits about their life. Looking at photos of sunsets or reading
one-liners takes no cognitive effort. It’s the mental equivalent of
snack food. You start eating one and before you know it you’ve gone
through two cans of Pringles and become a world expert on Evan Williams’
travel habits.

We need to stop pretending that this is automatically a good thing.
Perhaps Procter & Gamble doesn’t care of their making us into a nation
of fat slobs, but there’s no reason why programmers and the rest of the
startup world need to be so amoral. And no doubt, as pictures of cats
with poor spelling on them become all the rage, people are beginning to
wonder about where all this idiocy is leaving us. Which is where
apologists like Doctorow and Steven Johnson step in, assuring us that
Everything Bad is Good For You.

It isn’t. YouTube isn’t going to save us from an *Idiocracy*-style
future in which everyone sits at home and watches shows like “Ow! My
Balls!” (in which a man is repeatedly hit in the balls) — YouTube’s
damn-near creating that future. As I write this, YouTube’s \#1 featured
video is titled “Farting in Public”.

It doesn’t have to be that way, of course. Nobody prefers farting to
thought. It’s just that, as David Foster Wallace noted about television,
“people tend to be extremely similar in their vulgar and prurient and
dumb interests and wildly different in their refined and aesthetic and
noble interests.” Similarly, no one (Doctorow included, I suspect),
actually prefers blog posts to novels, it’s just that people tend to
have more short chunks of time to read blog posts than they do long
chunks of time to read novels.

Technology was supposed to let us solve these problems. But technology
never solves things by itself. At bottom, it requires people to sit down
and build tools that solve them. Which, as long as programmers are all
competing to create the world’s most popular timewaster, it doesn’t seem
like anyone is going to do.


Secured Leisure
===============

April 22, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/securedleisure)

* * * * *

> When I was disengaged myself, as above mentioned, from private
> business, I flattered myself that, by the sufficient though moderate
> fortune I had acquired, had secured leisure during the rest of my life
> for philosophical studies and amusements. I purchased all Dr. Spence’s
> apparatus, who had come from England to lecture in Philadelphia, and I
> proceeded in my electrical experiments with great alacrity; but the
> public, now considering me as a man of leisure, laid hold of me for
> their purposes; every part of our civil government—and almost at the
> same time—imposing some duty upon me. The Governor put me into the
> commission of the peace; the corporation of the city chose me one of
> the common council, and soon after alderman; and the citizens at large
> elected me a burgess to represent them in the Assembly.

(Benjamin Franklin, *Autobiography*)


A Call for Science that Matters
===============================

April 24, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stmcall)

* * * * *

Ever see a study that makes you scratch your beard? Ever hear about a
research result that makes you go “I wish everybody knew about this!”?
Ever want to run into a congressman’s office and hit them over the head
with a journal article? In this era of technological complexity and
postmodern fiction, sometimes brain scans can reveal more about the
human condition than a new novel. And yet, while the novels get detailed
reviews in the *New York Times*, the best a research study is likely to
get is an inaccurate description and some ambiguous quotes from the
study’s authors.

Well, here’s your chance to change that. In the comments, post your
favorite study — the one that makes you sit up and say “wow, this result
ought to change everything”. If you don’t mind, we’ll take the best to
help fill up a new website we’re starting, collecting and sharing these
new research results. (If you want to help us with the project, [be sure
to let us know!](mailto:editors@sciencethatmatters.com))

I’ll go first:

In 1994, the RAND Corporation, a major US military think tank, conducted
a massive study (with funding from the Office of National drug Control
Policy, the US Army, and the Ford Foundation) to measure the
effectiveness of various forms of preventing the use of illegal drugs,
particularly cocaine.

They analyzed a variety of popular methods and calculated how much it
would cost to use each method to reduce cocaine consumption in the US by
1%. Source-country control — military programs to destroy drug
production in countries like Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia — are not just
devastating to poor third-world citizens; they’re also the least
effective, costing \$783 million for a 1% reduction. Interdiction —
seizing the drugs at the border — is a much better deal, costing only
\$366 million. Domestic law enforcement — arresting drug dealers and
such — is even better, at \$246 million. But all of those are blown
completely out of the water by the final option: funding treatment
programs for drug addicts would reduce drug use by 1% at a cost of only
\$34 million.

In other words, for every dollar spent on trying to stop drugs through
source-country control, we could get the equivalent of twenty dollars
benefit by spending the same money on treatment. This isn’t a bunch of
hippy liberals saying this. This is a government think tank, sponsored
by the US Army.

-   [Read the
    study](http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR331/index2.html)

OK, your turn.


The Incurable Romantic
======================

May 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/romantic)

* * * * *

> “romantic”—a curious word meaning all things to all people. From my
> point of view, it means that in [one’s] emotional relationships [one]
> should not be too bright—something, perhaps, that I should not state
> so baldly. But again and again the action of the [romance] novel’s
> plot is carried forward by our hero’s failure to realize that in any
> man’s life there are literally dozens, if not hundreds, of women who
> will do just as well; that he won’t die if he doesn’t win fair Susan’s
> dainty hand; and that very probably he will catch a most uninteresting
> variety of hell if he does win it. Which, come to think of it, is not
> unrealistic: emotional maturity is one of the rarest qualities in
> life.

(Frank Yerby, [How and Why I Write the Costume
Novel](http://www.harpers.org/archive/1959/10/0009138))


Lengthy Interview
=================

May 7, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/interview2)

* * * * *

The other day I had [a lengthy
interview](http://blog.outer-court.com/archive/2007-05-07-n78.html) with
Philipp Lenssen of Google Blogoscoped, which he’s now posted with little
editing. It’s interesting to see how stilted my normal IM conversation
sounds when reformated into paragraphs.

I say a bunch of things in the interview that are probably going to
upset various people I know. In my defense, it was an interview — I
didn’t rehearse my remarks in advance — but I’ll post corrections here
if I said anything outrageously wrong.

Postscript: I did finish Intuition. It took me surprisingly long to
realize it was just a novelization of the Baltimore affair!

**Update:** [Help, I’m trapped in a trend
story!](http://valleywag.com/tech/archetypes/the-nontrepreneur-258466.php)


Follow Your Heart
=================

May 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/followyourheart)

* * * * *

For years, I’ve wanted to be on public radio. As a kid, we used to hear
the voices of Garrison Keillor and Ira Glass and even Carl Kasell, while
our parents drove us around in the stationwagon. As I grew older, I came
to respect radio as a particularly unique medium for explaining things
to people; a skill, like writing, that I wished to develop.

I’ve had a few desultory attempts, but I finally had a good excuse to
get my act together. Public broadcasting people are sponsoring a [Public
Radio Talent Quest](http://www.publicradioquest.com/) and I’ve decided
to submit an entry. My idea was to make a radio show about science that
matters.

[Here’s my first attempt](http://www.publicradioquest.com/node/1484).
(You can listen and vote for me on the contest’s website.)

For those who don’t love the magic of radio, a transcript follows:

> It’s 1958 and you’re sitting on a table with your shirt off. You
> signed up for an experiment on vitamins improving vision and now
> someone’s plunging a needle into your arm. Ow! Since when do vitamins
> require needles anyway?
>
> *[music: Waltz (Better Than Fine) - Fiona Apple]*
>
> Now the man is gone and you’re waiting for the experiment to start.
> There’s another kid here too. You both look pretty bored. Then the
> other kid starts goofing off. Doodling, making paper airplanes, that
> sort of thing. And then you feel it.
>
> *[TAP tap tap…]*
>
> Your hands begin to shake. Your heart starts to pound. Your face
> begins to feel flushed.
>
> *[…tap tap TAP.]*
>
> Boy, goofing off sure looks like fun. So you join in.
>
> * * * * *
>
> So that shot in your arm? The thing is, it’s actually adrenaline.
> Hand-shaking, heart-pounding, face-flushing adrenaline.
>
> Half the kids in the experiment were told the shot might make their
> hearts race. And those kids? They sat quietly, even while the other
> kid in the room with them goofed off. But the rest? The ones, like
> you, who weren’t told? They joined right in.
>
> One kid started throwing wads of paper at passersby. Another grabbed a
> piece of equipment off the wall and used it as a hula-hoop. They just
> felt so *good*, they later explained.
>
> * * * * *
>
> We think of our feelings as unerring: follow your heart, do what makes
> you happy — that sort of thing. But what the adrenaline experiment
> showed is that it’s not so simple. Feelings don’t come with nice,
> clean explanations. Our brain makes a guess. And sometimes it guesses
> wrong.
>
> We’re not the slaves of our emotions. For the kids in the experiment,
> just knowing *why* they were feeling a certain way was enough to
> change their response.
>
> Following your heart can be fun. But it’s also nice to know that you
> don’t have to.


Discrimination and Causation
============================

May 23, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/discrimcause)

* * * * *

**First,** let’s imagine that tomorrow scientists announced the
discovery of rock-solid, unimpeachable, 100% convincing evidence of
differences in mental function between men and women. Let’s say, for
example, they notice that there’s a tiny hole where the “math center” of
the brain should be. No wonder they do worse at math!

No doubt, *The Times* would respond with [a handwringing
article](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/003894.html)
about the important scientific implications and David Brooks would
[throw a
party](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/003246.html)
and denounce closed-minded liberals. George Bush would cancel programs
aimed at helping girls learn math and Harvard University would shut down
their task force on getting women tenure.

But are these really appropriate responses? Showing genetic differences
is only the first in a long line of things that need to be shown to
prove that gender-based disparities in tenure are unavoidable. [As
Jeremy
Freese](http://jeremyfreese.blogspot.com/2006/11/twenty-four-stories-of-internal.html)
has pointed out, it’s a long line from genes to social outcomes. To make
the case, you need to go a lot further.

**Second,** you have to show the genetic differences are relevant. It’s
possible the hole in the math center could be completely insignificant,
that women do just as well at math irrespective. So you need to show
that the hole *causes* differences in functioning. One way to do this is
to find different people with differing sizes of holes, control for as
many other factors as possible, and see if the size of hole is
correlated with some test of math functioning.

**Third,** you need to prove that the differences are unavoidable. The
brain has amazing levels of neuroplasticity. Perhaps with the right
environment, women can be taught to do math with another part of their
brain. Perhaps, as a result, they might even do *better* than men at
math. Again, [Freese has pointed
out](http://jeremyfreese.blogspot.com/2006/11/eight-plots-revised.html)
that the same genetic differences (or genetic similarities) can go all
sorts of different places in different environments. If there’s an easy
environmental change that makes even genetically different women equally
good at math, we ought to make it.

**Fourth,** you need to show a causal link from the genetic difference
to the tenure disparity. Why is it that doing worse at math causes you
to do worse at tenure? Are speed-math-tests used as a relevant factor in
tenure decisions? If so, maybe you guys should really cut that out,
because that’s a pretty stupid test.

**Fifth,** you need to show that it’s the only cause of discrimination.
Even if genetic differences cause some of the disparity, it’s still
morally required for us to remove the rest. Do guys with holes in their
math center do just as bad as women at getting tenure? Do women with no
holes do just as well as men?

Right now, there’s only even arguable evidence for the very first of
these. Those of us who want to shove discrimination under the rug need
to do a lot more work on the other four.


That Vision Thing
=================

May 30, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visionthing)

* * * * *

Ironically enough, I remember the moment clearly. It was about five
years ago now, when I looked up from the car and realized I couldn’t
see. I had been staring at my computer a lot, and reading books when I
wasn’t doing that, so I didn’t notice much, but that day, riding in the
car, I looked up and realized I couldn’t read the street sign. I
definitely used to be able to read that sign, but there it was, big and
bright and green along the highway, and all I could make out was a blur.
I had gone blind.

Legally blind, as I learned yesterday. My vision is below the legal
threshold in the US for legal blindness. (Far below, as far as I can
tell, but the eye exam chart doesn’t really make fine-grained
distinctions at that level.) And yet, for five years, this never really
bothered me. I never wore glasses for more than an hour, I squinted hard
enough to pass the vision test at the DMV, I sat close to blackboards
and listened carefully.

I tried a couple things to improve my eyesight, but nothing very
seriously. I tried, but it never seemed important enough to warrant the
effort. And so I walked thru life, legally blind. I didn’t really
notice.

My roommate, Quinn, has been nagging me about this. She wants me to get
LASIK, I think largely because it involves lasers. But finally the other
day I took some action and went to the optometrist.

You know those eye charts you see sometimes? The ones that famously
start with E at the top and then the letters get smaller and smaller? I
couldn’t read the E. When I looked up at it, all I saw was a vague blur.
So they gave me contacts.

Contacts are an odd thing. They’re almost invisible, malleable little
things that you can’t see once they’re stuck on your eye. One minute,
you’re living a Monet-like existence of a world blurred, then tap your
eye and suddenly, invisibly, everything is clear.

I had no idea the world really looked like this, with such infinite
clarity. It looks like a modernist photo or a hyperreal film, everything
in focus everywhere. Everyone kept saying “oh, do you see the leaves
now?” but the first thing I saw was not the leaves but the people.
People, individuated, each with brilliant faces and expressions at
gaits, the sun streaming down upon them. I couldn’t help but smile. It’s
much harder being a misanthrope when you can see people’s faces.

Then came the signs, the signs with messages I could read from a
distance. No longer would I have to carefully count my stops on the
subway because I couldn’t read the station signs. And then the
buildings, their edges no longer fuzzy like clouds but hard and harsh
and magnificent.

I no longer feared myself, formerly this vague visage in the mirror that
I had to look away from. Now in the mirror I could see my face, and even
thought it looked good.

The resolution on my cameraphone suddenly seems insufficient. The crumbs
and dirt in our apartment that previously drove my roommate crazy are
now visible enough to drive me crazy too. I can look people in the eye
and smile and see them smile back. I can see the contours of their
faces. When I look up at night I can see the things in my room, even
when the lights are off.

My eyes are open and I can now experience the beauty that’s been more
than a few feet in front of my nose.


Books I Recommend Without Reservation: 2006
===========================================

June 28, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)

* * * * *

I read over a hundred and twenty books in 2006. Some of them were OK.
Some were good. Some were very good. Here are the handful that I can
recommend you read without any reservations. This isn’t a top ten list;
the books aren’t in any particularly meaningful order. These are just
the books that I can honestly say that, as a human being, I think you
will enjoy reading (and you’ll be a better person for having done so).

Annette Lareau, *[Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0520239504)* 
:   This loving ethnography is like a trip inside the lives of children.
    Laureau spends time with families black and white; poor,
    middle-class, and wealthy. The description is engrossing and the
    theoretical contributions thought-provoking, even if you have no
    background in the field.
G. H. Hardy *[A Mathematician’s Apology](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521427061)* ([PDF](http://www.math.ualberta.ca/~mss/misc/A%20Mathematician%27s%20Apology.pdf))
:   Godfrey Hardy was a great mathematician. But, looking back on his
    life, he wondered what it was he had actually contributed to
    society. In this, his classic defense of his pragmatically-worthless
    profession, he examines what it means to have spent your life
    wisely. (Previous thoughts: [my
    apology](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nonapology),
    [Legacy](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/legacy).)
Raymond Smullyan, *[5000 BC (And Other Philosophical Fantasies)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312295162)* 
:   In this bizarrely delightful little book, Smullyan, the famed
    recreational logician, addresses topics from the annoyances on long
    car rides to the most difficult problems in philosophy, often at
    once, using stories that are so delightfully amusing that it seems
    hard to believe they could have any educational value.
Atul Gawande, *[Complications: A Surgeon’s Notes on an Imperfect Science](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312421702)* 
:   Since I read this book, Gawande has become something of a rock star,
    but here he is the mild-mannered surgeon who’s writing on *Slate*
    got him picked up by the *New Yorker*. The columns in this book are
    collected from his pieces for that magazine and address with
    reflection and investigation the various difficulties of modern
    medicine.
George Saunders, *[In Persuasion Nation: Stories](http://books.theinfo.org/go/159448242X)* 
:   I have to be honest with you. I’m not really one for science
    fiction. Indeed, I’m not a big fan of fiction in general. But George
    Saunders is different: I’ll read just about anything by him.
    Saunders’ stories manage to combine a whimsically-imagined future,
    biting critique of our present era, along with a use of language so
    delightfully varied that one wonders how one man can have such
    control over his authorial voice.
Thomas Geoghegan, *[Which Side Are You On?: Trying to Be for Labor When It’s Flat on Its Back](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1565848861)* 
:   One would think a book on labor history would be dreadfully dull
    and, more to the point, depressing. And yet, in the first chapter of
    this book, I found something that made me laugh or smile widely on
    practically every page. My friend Rick Perlstein got me to read this
    book by [telling
    me](http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?articleId=9730) it was “the
    best political book of the last 15 years [—] the best book of the
    last 15 years.” (He’s since taken me to meet Geoghegan several
    times.) It’s hard to imagine a book more important and touching.
Robert Karen, *[Becoming Attached: Unfolding the Mystery of the Infant-Mother Bond and Its Impact on Later Life](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015)* 
:   At the beginning of the last century, doctors thought parental love
    was unimportant: [parents weren’t allowed to even visit their kids
    in the hospital](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hospitalbabies),
    psychology experts encouraged moms not to hug or kiss their
    children, the US government handed out pamphlets on how to be firm
    with your children. This *tour de force* book tells the amazing
    story of how all that was overturned by a group of dedicated
    scientists whose research into the subject of parental love brought
    some of the most stunningly strong results in the entire field of
    psychology. Thrillingly good story, textbook on the science, and
    self-help guide all in one — I can’t recommend this book enough.
David Feige, *[Indefensible: One Lawyer’s Journey into the Inferno of American Justice](http://books.theinfo.org/go/031615623X)* 
:   Being a public defender is a fairly interesting job, but David Feige
    manages to make it downright fascinating in this in-depth
    description of his career. Feige describes his life in luscious
    detail, from the urine on his doorstep to the gritty details of the
    courtroom, and doesn’t hesitate to name names or dig into unpleasant
    subjects. If only there was a book this good on every career.
Scott McCloud, *[Making Comics: Storytelling Secrets of Comics, Manga and Graphic Novels](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0060780940)* 
:   Any Scott McCloud book is a treasure, but this one is especially
    probing. Essentially, McCloud asks what it is a writer does and what
    it takes to be a good one. His medium is comics, but a lot of the
    rules are applicable to other formats and it’s hard to imagine a
    book this curious or this well-written about them.
Dean Baker, *[The Conservative Nanny State: How the Wealthy Use the Government to Stay Rich and Get Richer](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1411693957)* ([full text](http://conservativenannystate.com/))
:   One wouldn’t expect a book about economic abuses to be fun, but Dean
    Baker manages to do it, mostly by turning everything you thought you
    knew about the subject topsy-turvy. I gave this book to a fairly
    conservative friend of mine and even he loved it. Plus it’s
    downloadable for free. ([Previous
    review.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/cns)) (Disclosure: I liked
    the book so much I converted it to HTML and got a free paperback
    copy in return.)
Jeremy Iversen, *[High School Confidential: Secrets of an Undercover Student](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743283635)* ([alt. link](http://isbn.nu/0743283635))
:   Leaving school, Jeremy Iversen didn’t find the world as exciting as
    he expected. So he went back. Posing as a high school student, with
    only the school’s principal knowing the truth, he spent half a year
    among the kids and teachers, documenting the life of the average
    Californian and wondering what it meant for our nation’s future. The
    result is an amazingly good read and a fascinating look at an
    incredibly important institution. ([Previous
    review.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverlearning))
    (Disclosure: I’ve [hung
    out](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingla) with the author.)
Laura Kipnis, *[Against Love: A Polemic](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375719326)* 
:   Kipnis is a rollickingly vicious writer, with sentences that have
    the rhythm and punch of a machine gun. But the book isn’t just a fun
    rant, it also makes an incredibly thought-provoking argument about
    what it means socially to be in a relationship. ([Previous
    review.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/againstlove))
Matt Taibbi and Mark Ames, *[The eXile: Sex, Drugs, and Libel in the New Russia](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0802136524)* 
:   Matt Taibbi is my favorite political journalist. He writes with a
    raw honesty that manages to be both politically biting and
    hilarious. This book tells the story of how, after playing
    professional basketball in Inner Mongolia, met up with co-founder
    Mark Ames and started an independent newspaper that danced in the
    flames of Russia’s dying society. The result is a strange and
    incredible book: stories of seedy dive bars full of drugged up loose
    women, intermixed with incredible feats of investigative journalism
    into the oligarchs dragging Russia down — without any change in
    tone. It’s wonderful.
Joan Didion, *[Political Fictions](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375718907)* 
:   Damn, this book is good. Nobody knows how to take a book and skewer
    it like Didion. The *New York Review of Books* pieces reprinted in
    here are simply some of the best eviscerations of any genre. Its
    hard to imagine how people can walk after a review like that.
Jonathan Franzen, *[The Corrections: A Novel](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312421273)* 
:   After the popular reviews and the Oprah’s Book Club selection, I had
    just about learned to ignore Franzen’s big novel. But when a friend
    told me she was loving it, I decided to check it out. That was no
    mistake. This is a thoughtful, readable piece of fiction, with big
    geeky topics and a hearty emotional core.
Rick Perlstein, *Nixonland* 
:   Perlstein’s last book, *Before the Storm*, managed to turn the story
    the a largely-dismissed political figure, Barry Goldwater, into a
    lesson on how the left can take over the country. Now, in
    *Nixonland*, he examines the turmoil of the 1960s with fresh eyes
    and the perfidy of the Nixon administration with new depth. I read
    the book as he was writing it and sent comments — apparently I was
    the first outside his home to finish it — and the final version
    hasn’t been published. But do be sure to pick it up as soon as it
    is.



Real Good Books
===============

July 4, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/realgoodbooks)

* * * * *

So I was sitting there, reading Natalie Angier’s *[The
Canon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618242953)* and complaining to my
roommate. “God, this book is so overwritten,” I whined. “This is the
worst science book since Lauren Slater published *Opening Skinner’s
Box*.” I read her a random sentence: “Am I sounding a self-pitying,
sour-grapes-turned-defensive whine? Of course: a good offense begins
with a nasal defensiveness.” I was about to read more when she stopped
me. “If that book is so bad,” she asked, “why do you keep reading it?”

And so, we decided on a plan: for the month of June, I would only read
good books. Unfortunately, this plan didn’t go as well as I had hoped —
good books are harder to find that it might seem at first. I realized
what I really wanted was books that were compulsively readable, the kind
that once you slurped down like wet noodles, where once you started in
on them you just couldn’t stop.

I’ve read a couple books like that, but not many. For example, [David
Boies’ autobiography](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375726551) isn’t the
kind of thing I would normally pick up. Self-aggrandizing
autobiographies aren’t exactly my thing and Boies, while interesting,
isn’t exactly a topic of fascination for me. But when I found myself
holding it with a couple minutes to kill, I started reading it and
before I noticed it I was most of the way through the 500 page book.

Or take James Wolcott’s *[Attack
Poodles](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140135212X)*. Now I love a good
media-bashing as much as the next guy, but this one I just couldn’t put
down. I had to sneak away from dinner to finish reading it. And when it
was done, I found myself wanting more.

What both books have in common, aside from being fun reads, is a small
red rectangle on in the upper left of their covers. The rectangle is
part of the “Miramax Books” logo which stretches from the back cover
around the spine to the front of every book they publish. As far as I
know, Miramax is the only publisher audacious enough to put their logo
on the cover of their books, and while I initially took it as a sign of
Hollywood arrogance, I now see it as something else: a mark of quality.
Perhaps, I figured, Miramax works so hard to make their books readable
that they want to capitalize on that brand by making it really clear
which ones were theirs. I even dreamed of having my books published by
Miramax.

So when my plan for June fizzled out, I tried to think of how I could
fix things for July. And I hit upon the idea of spending it only reading
Miramax books. Unfortunately for me, when the Weinstein Brothers (who
ran Miramax) left Disney, Miramax Books got the axe. The Weinstein
Brothers have restarted their book division at their new company
(cleverly named The Weinstein Company, apparently because Fellowship
Adventure Group was [“too
gay”](http://gawker.com/topic/the-weinsteins-fellowship-adventure-group-015542.php))
but their first real book doesn’t come out until September.

So here’s a plea to you readers: where does one find compulsively
readable books? Who do *you* trust?


Fear and Loathing in Biotechnology Firms
========================================

July 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fearandbio)

* * * * *

I was sitting with my journalist and reading *Fear and Loathing* when I
noticed that things weren’t seeming the way I’d become accustomed to
them seeming. For one thing, my journalist’s nose seemed a fair sight
bigger than one would expect a nose to be, even accounting for taste,
while her eyes seemed to be moving back and forth in her head as if they
weren’t quite sure whether they preferred it in or out.

Still, I shouldn’t criticize. I suspect I didn’t look my usual self
either, what with my head making those small wobbly notions on my neck
and my leg vibrating back and forth as if it were thinking very hard
about something. Why it was forced to work as my leg, supporting me all
the time while i gave it no consideration in return, perhaps.

As I finished the book I slammed it down on the desk, causing a couple
other books to fall off the side. “We must rent a very fast car,” I
demanded, before scrunching up my face in an inevitably doomed attempt
to get a look at myself. I didn’t normally sound like this.

My journalist agreed, so we popped some pills and picked up a BMW. It
was a little past midnight at the time, so you could hardly notice the
car’s nasty habit of accelerating right up to the edge of other cars,
stopping hard a couple inches before it hit them.

“We must find a heart of darkness,” said my journalist. I just looked at
her. She continued mumbling about a heart of darkness while stepping on
the accelerator. I decided to look away. She continued to make friends
with the accelerator. “I’ve got it—” she shouted, wrenching the car
around, “Vacaville!”

My journalist assured me that Vacaville was a small city outside San
Francisco filled with giant vats of transgenic mutant corn that cured
cancer. I wasn’t quite sure what any of that really was, let alone which
part of that was a heart of darkness. My fears were not allayed when we
pulled off the freeway under a giant light-up sign that said “Authentic
Historic Vacaville”, only to see a couple 7-11s and a CostCo. We got
back on the freeway.

The next time we got off the freeway, there were a dozen industrial
buildings with sinister yellow lighting belching vast plumes of smoke
into the air. We ditched the car behind a tree, dropped our wallets and
identification in it, and, arm-in-arm, begun strolling through a place
which had even less claim to the title of Authentic Historic Vacaville.

In 2006, the leading biotechnology firm Genentech was named the number
one “Best Company To Work For” by *Fortune Magazine*. I suppose this
incredible allure could explain why the company’s campus was surrounded
by barbed wire. It did not, however, explain why the barbed wire was
facing *in*.

There are a couple of ways to get into the Genentech campus. You can
climb the barbed wire fence. You can swipe an ID badge and go through
the imposing metal turnstiles. You can drive past the guard at the main
gate and show some kind of ID. Or you can find the side gate that they
forgot to lock and open it. My journalist didn’t want to scratch her
pants, so we used the side gate.

And that was how we found ourselves strolling in the moonlight around
the factories of a leading biotechnology firm.

“This place is incredible,” my journalist said, as we approached it.
“Construction worker,” I said, as I spotted a man walking through the
corridors of the empty new building. We continued walking around it.

“I’m always morally torn by major biotech companies,” she explained.
“Smoke break,” I said, as the construction worker stepped outside the
building and paused.

“On the one hand, this place makes drugs that save people’s lives —
treatments for cancers and cystic fibrosis and asthma,” she told me.
“Heading out,” I told her, as the construction worker walked across the
campus towards the gate.

“And yet, on the other hand, this place is pure evil.” We walked past
large vats labeled “Poison” and huge machines that looked like they
could crush us. Smoke belched from the top of the building and we could
see more buildings and a parking lot in the distance.

“Companies like this are made up of dozens of people, each of whom,
individually, are the sweetest guys. Nice, friendly people who just care
about doing well at their work.” As we approached the buildings, we saw
that even now — 2AM — the place was alive. New cars were pulling into
the lot and men and women were walking from building to building. The
yellowed light on their white lab coats gave the whole thing a sinister
air.

“And yet, together, they manage to pull off the most incomprehensible
evils.” I was about to join her discussion of organizational sociology
when I heard a go-kart pull up behind us.

“Excuse me,” said the man in the go-kart. “Do you folks work here?”

I was about to come up with some explanation but my journalist dodged in
front of me and saved me the trouble.

“No, sir,” she said, with complete sincerity.

“Do you have visitors’ badges?” asked the man, sounding a bit puzzled.

“Definitely not,” she said.

“Are you supposed to be here?”

“No way. Actually, we were just going for a stroll when we found
ourselves in this bizarre place. We were wondering if you could tell us
how to get out.”

The man in the go-kart thought about this for a while before getting out
of the kart and walking towards us. As he stepped into the light I could
see he was wearing a bright orange vest.

“Huh, well the fastest way to get out of the facility from here is
probably to walk through the entire campus,” he explained.

“Oh, I see,” said the journalist. “Well, could you escort us off the
premises then?” she asked. I restrained myself from kicking her.

The man in the vest looked back at the go-kart, where his partner was
sitting. “Nah, my there’s no more room in the kart,” he said.

“Oh, well then maybe you could take us to security?” she said. I dug a
small hole in the ground, placed my foot into it, then used the other
foot to fill it back up with dirt in a vain attempt to stop myself from
kicking her.

“I’m actually not allowed to take you guys to Genentech security,” he
said. “See, I’m over with construction. One of my men came by and told
me that he saw to people walking around the premises, so I just came to
check it out.” He thought about this for a while. “Let me see if I can
find you someone,” he said.

And that is how we got a burly man in a bright orange vest to escort us
onto the Genetech campus, a series of industrial buildings facing a
shared quadrangle of matted grass, with some concrete sidewalks laid
across it. The whole thing looked a bit like a college campus, I
suppose, if the college’s buildings had been designed to look like some
kind of sci-fi bubble city. Through the windows one could spy huge
machines with many levers dials and large vats that stuff was being
oozed into and out of.

People entered and exited the buildings in a hurried manner, and one
scientist, a frazzled-looking man with a redhead’s beard and an orange
t-shirt reading “got juice?”, crossed the path in front of us.

“Excuse me,” said the man in the vest, his manly striding posture
suddenly becoming bowed and deferential before the frazzled scientist.
“I found these people who got lost wandering around the campus,” he
explained, as if it was a question. “Do you think you could try to get
them home?”

“Oh, sure!” said the scientist, genial and alive as a carnival barker,
as if he made a habit of wandering around the Genentech campus at 2 in
the morning looking for people to take back to their cars.

“Thanks so much,” said the man in the vest, before scurrying back to his
go-kart.

The scientist reached for a walkie-talkie from his back pocket.
“Security, are you there? Security?” he said and paused. The radio
crackled. “This is security,” it finally replied. “Where are you?” he
asked. There was a pause. Then a crackle. “What?”

“Are you in your office?” Pause, crackle. “Um, yeah.”

“OK, be there in a bit.”

And that was how a Genentech scientist badged us into the facility and
begun taking us through its corridors.

“So what do you do here?” I asked, as if making conversation.

“Oh, we, um, make drugs to treat breast cancer,” he explained.

“Yeah, right,” my journalist whispered in my ear. “Awful big facility
just for treating breast cancer.”

“What do you do?” I asked. “Oh, I’m a scientist here.”

“Oh, really? A scientist? Heh, I always imagined scientists wandering
around in big white labcoats carrying beakers,” I joked. “Oh, we do,” he
said with utter sincerity. “Actually, I just took my lab coat off — if
you guys had been here a couple minutes earlier I would have been
wearing it.”

We wandered past hallways labeled with Genentech propaganda and stopped
right before the company cafeteria, ducking into a door to find the desk
for security.

“Hey there!” said the scientist. “Hi,” said the bored-looking
African-American woman behind the desk.

“Um, these two folks got a bit lost wandering around the neighborhood
and I was wondering you could help get them out of here.”

The security woman’s eyes widened. “What?” she shouted. “You brought
random strangers in here? They can’t be in here! You can’t just bring
people in here!”

“Well, I just figured I ought to take them to security and you guys
could help them out.”

“Help them out? Help them out? I’m not allowed to leave this desk,” she
cried. “Oh, they can’t be in here. You gotta get rid of these guys.”

“Oh, okay,” said the scientist, completely unfazed. “Well, I’ll walk
them back to their car.”

“Yeah, whatever,” she said dismissively. “You just do what you gotta do,
‘cause they can’t be in here.”

And that was how a Genentech scientist took us through the building,
past offices, through the loading dock, out the back past more
industrial equipment, a running commentary all the way.

“How’d you guys get in here?” asked the guard at the gate as we walked
past him. He’d obviously heard about us. “Oh,” my journalist said, “it
was open. We just walked in.” The guard just laughed and waved.

The scientist asked where we were from, just in the spirit of making
conversation. My journalist explained that we were from San Francisco
and we’d decided it was a nice night for a casual stroll, so we had been
walking around Vacaville. The scientist nodded approvingly, as if he
always ran into cityfolk who came out for a stroll around Vacaville’s
office parks at 2 in the morning.

Soon we’d located our car and said our goodbyes. The scientist waved
goodbye at us and we tried to stifle our giggles until we got back to
the car.

At moments like these, which seem to stand outside of space and time —
middle of nowhere, middle of the night — one thing remains constant:
Denny’s. Always open, with decor that hasn’t changed since its founding
in the 1960s, a diner like Denny’s is a perfect place to go to make
sense of it all. But none of it makes any sense at all; there is nothing
to do but lay your head down on the table and puzzle at a world that is
more strange than you can possibly imagine.


Announcing the Open Library
===========================

July 16, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/openlibrary)

* * * * *

Early this year, when I left my job at Wired Digital, I thought I could
look forward to months of lounging around San Francisco, reading books
on the beach and drinking fine champagne and eating *foie gras*. Then I
got a phone call. Brewster Kahle of the Internet Archive was thinking of
pursuing a project that I’d been trying to do literally for years. I
thought long and hard about it and realized I couldn’t pass this
opportunity up. So I put aside my dreams of lavish living and once again
threw myself into my work. Just as well, I suppose, since San
Francisco’s beaches are freezing cold, champagne has a disgusting taste,
and *foie gras* is even worse.

I thought of the smartest programmers and designers I knew and gave them
a ring, sat down for coffee with them, threatened to fly out to their
homes and knock on their doors. In the end, we got together an amazing
group of people — all sworn to secrecy of course — and in the past few
months we’ve put together what’s probably the biggest project I ever
worked on.

So today I’m extraordinarily proud to announce [the Open
Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about) project. Our goal is to
build the world’s greatest library, then put it up on the Internet free
for all to use and edit. Books are the place you go when you have
something you want to share with the world — our planet’s cultural
legacy. And never has there been a bigger attempt to bring them all
together.

I hope you’ll take a look and let me know what you think. And if this
project excites you the way it excites me, I hope you’ll join us.

-   [Visit the Open Library site](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about)



Fear and Loathing: A Correction
===============================

July 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fearandbio-correction)

* * * * *

The other week in a post titled [Fear and Loathing in Biotechnology
Firms](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fearandbio), I wrote:

> “Hey there!” said the scientist. “Hi,” said the bored-looking
> African-American woman behind the desk.

In response, I recently received the following comment from a poster who
goes by the name “I WAS THERE THAT NIGHT”:

> I’m not a large african american woman, and there was no desk. Your
> “facts” are incorrect, and you looked very very scared that night, my
> friend.

I’d like to take this moment to correct the record. Upon reflection,
security sat behind a barrier that was indeed tall enough to make it a
“counter” and not a “desk”. We at *Raw Thought* deplore the casual use
of language that causes many speakers to conflate counters with desks
and we strive for precision in these matters. We deeply regret the
error.

I’d also like to take this moment to correct another error. The same
article suggests the same so-called “desk” was reached after “ducking
into a door”. After a further review of notes by the author, we have
concluded that it was not actually a door, but more of a small hallway
leading to several doors, really a kind of alcove actually.

I hope this post underscores our commitment to “facts” at *Raw Thought*.
We continue to stand by our claims that journalists noses look bigger
while on drugs, that giant vats of transgenic corn cure cancer, that
CostCo is authentically historic, and that Genentech is the Best Company
to Work For in America. We can only hope that its employees continue to
read our quality content.


Consciousness Clarified
=======================

August 1, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/conclar)

* * * * *

You ever notice how when you learn a new word you begin seeing it used
everywhere? Lately I’ve been feeling that way about consciousness. I
knew the word before, obviously, but lately I’ve clarified my thoughts
about what it *is* and sloppy usage of the term sticks out like a sore
thumb.

“Consciousness”, the dictionary kindly explains, is “the state or
condition of being conscious.” And we all basically know what it means
to be conscious. You poke someone awake and ask “Are you conscious?” You
get hit on the head by a large rock and you get knocked unconscious.
Being conscious, in short, means being awake, being aware of your
surroundings, seeing colors and feeling pinches and hearing songs.

Now there’s something weird about being conscious — something so weird,
in fact, that I’ve found many people are bizarrely tempted to deny it.
Consciousness is what the philosopher John Searle calls “ontologically
subjective”. That is, when you see the color red, while it’s true that
all sorts of complicated things happen in your eyes and brains, a
particular experience — the one we call “seeing red” — happens only to
you. If aliens with the most powerful viewing technology possible beamed
down to earth and peeked inside your brain, they’d still have no idea
what the color red looked like. They’d see that a certain wavelength of
light triggered certain electrical impulses in certain centers, but
they’d never see *red*. It’s just not there.

Now we don’t know for sure what *causes* consciousness (it’s an ongoing
research project) but whatever the answer is, it must be caused by
*something*. Yet this obvious fact is continually missed by laypeople
who make bizarre comments like “as soon as computers become self-aware,
they might become conscious”.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ This is as absurd as saying
that as soon as computers are told about food, they might start
digesting things.

Consciousness isn’t some vague property of things that look smart to us.
It has a real, physical meaning: feeling things. I suppose it’s
logically possible that a talking robot might start feeling things, but
the chances seem awfully remote.

* * * * *

1.  Example: [This week’s *New York Times
    Magazine*](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/29/magazine/29robots-t.html?pagewanted=all)
    suggests “a robot might exhibit the first glimmers of consciousness,
    ‘namely, the reflexive ability of a mind to examine itself over its
    own shoulder.’” [↩](#fnref:fn1)




Sci Foo 2007 Gossip Liveblog
============================

August 4, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scifoo07)

* * * * *

*Industry heavyweights [O’Reilly](http://www.oreilly.com/),
[Google](http://www.google.com/), and [Nature](http://www.nature.com/)
come together to sponsor a science-focused version of O’Reilly’s runaway
success [FOO Camp](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foo_Camp), bringing
together top people in the field to eat and gab and plot. Our
correspondent on the scene at Google headquarters in Mountain View and
the conference hotel in Sunnyvale (where Google purchased a room for
every attendee) will be providing live updates on the famous and their
doings.*

### Friday night

[Martha Stewart](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martha_Stewart) is here
with her boyfriend [Charles
Simonyi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Simonyi). [Frank
Wilczek](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_Wilczek) is just as friendly
in person as on TV. Dinner with [Nat
Torkington](http://radar.oreilly.com/nat/) and [Hal
Varian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hal_Varian). [James
Randi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Randi) just told me to get
glasses. [Esther](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esther_Dyson) and
[Freeman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_Dyson) are here — double
Dyson decadence! [Paul
Sereno](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Sereno), America’s Most
Photogenic Paleontologist looks photogenic in person too. [Jaron
Lanier](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaron_Lanier) seems to know
everyone.

Kid looks past me to ask what the guy next to me does. I look miffed. He
looks back at me and says “well, come on, everyone knows your story.”

[Tim O’Reilly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_O%27Reilly) kicks things
off by singing a duet of “I Feel Good”. [Ted
Selker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ted_Selker) gabs about our
distractible mutual friend. [Dean
Kamen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Kamen) brags about the robots
he’s seen. [Lee Smolin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lee_Smolin).
[Eugenie Scott](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Scott) gets a round
of applause. [Neal
Stephenson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal_Stephenson) and [Kim
Stanley Robinson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Stanley_Robinson) are
sitting together. Lots of comic book artists. [Theodore
Gray](http://www.theodoregray.com/). [Chris
Anderson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Anderson_%28writer%29).
[Yossi Vardi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yossi_Vardi) says hi. [Eric
Drexler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_Drexler). Vik Olliver talks
about his [self-replicating 3D printers](http://reprap.org/). [Danny
Hillis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danny_Hillis). [George
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Dyson_%28science_historian%29)
is also here. [Sergey Brin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Brin)
says he likes neck stretches.

A quick glance makes it seem about 10% female, but Tim says it’s more
like 23%.

Paul Sereno brought a bunch of fossils. We’re not supposed to blog them
until he’s published. [Drew
Endy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drew_Endy) talks about domesticating
biotech and [a summer camp](http://www.igem2007.com/) where college
freshmen do their own biotech engineering. [Felice
Frankel](http://web.mit.edu/felicef/) shows series of brilliant science
photos from her work with G. M. Whitesides and promotes
[imageandmeaning.org](http://imageandmeaning.org/). [Saul
Griffith](http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~saul/) and [Jim
McBride](http://foocamp.crowdvine.com/profile/show/1216) show a series
of diagrams to explain energy sources, paths, and usage. Charles Simonyi
talks about his time in space. Martha Stewart talks about the food she
made for him.

The hallways are full of people to talk to — I don’t go for a minute
before getting into a conversation. [Kovas
Boguta](http://www.wolframscience.com/summerschool/2003/participants/boguta.html)
hints at his latest secret project. [Sarah
Brown](http://sarahbrown.name/?page_id=2) catches up. The famed
[LH](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04472868563053273609) shares her
inexhaustible supply of *love*. [Daniel
Chudnov](http://onebiglibrary.net/bio) of the Library of Congress
introduces himself and tells me about the ten terabytes of data they
have at [Chronicling America](http://www.loc.gov/chroniclingamerica/).
[Brady Forrest](http://radar.oreilly.com/brady/) tells me about the many
conferences he worries about.

### Saturday

[Martha](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martha_Stewart) saw one of her
subordinates eat food that’s been out too long and worried that she
would die of salmonella. [Vaughan
Bell](http://www.iop.kcl.ac.uk/staff/profile/?go=10947) tells me what
it’s like to study people with psychosis and delusions. A group at
breakfast wonders who is the Richard Feynman and Carl Sagan of our era.
CSI has driven so many people into forensics that colleges have started
whole new programs because of it — can we do the same for the rest of
science? “Science shows always show us at the university all day,” one
complains. “How come they never show us at the pub or at meetings like
this?”

In one session a group of people discuss their citizen science projects
— attempts to let normal people assist them with science. Others talk
about visualizing data and transporting huge swaths of it. Google
security is frighteningly helpful. [Danny
Hillis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danny_Hillis) talks in the hallway
about buying land for his clock. [Jeff
Hawkins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Hawkins) talks about his
neocortical theory. [Eugenie
Scott](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Scott) speaks on the attacks
on evolution. [Henry Gee](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Gee) on the
Jewish community in London: “People are shocked if their rabbi is not a
practicing lesbian.”

I signed up to give a talk.

At lunch there was a fellow working on genetically evolving robots,
using a 3D printer to make the robots. Zach Kaplan of
[Inventables](http://www.inventables.com/) had a big bag at the table,
from which he kept pulling out the most amazing things — squishy
magnets, plastic that expands in water, instant snow, erasable pens, and
so on. It was hilariously fun. On the way back in my old friend [Chris
Anderson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Anderson_%28writer%29) said
hi and plugged his new startup with the inimitable [Adam
Goldstein](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Goldstein_(author)),
[BookTour](http://booktour.com/). Adam — say hi sometime!

Theo Gray [demoes Mathematica 6](http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/).
[Ted Kaehler](http://weather-dimensions.com/tedkaehler/us/ted/), a
lieutenant of [Alan Kay](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Kay), demoes
the latest stuff from [Squeakland](http://squeakland.org/), which has
similar demos but for kids and with less elegance. ([Dean
Kamen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Kamen) got very interested;
presumably for [FIRST](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIRST).) [Bjørn
Lomborg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bj%C3%B8rn_Lomborg) takes his
[Copenhagen
Consensus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen_Consensus) show on
the road. Hugh Reinhoff tells how he diagnosed his daughter’s congenital
illness by sequencing her DNA to find the genetic mutation. (Harvard
charges only \$3.50 a reaction!) “All the stuff you need these days is
available on the Web,” he explains. “But the doctors get totally freaked
out.”

The Google buildings are almost mazelike.

[George
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Dyson_%28science_historian%29)
has a standing-room-only talk on “Gödel and the Draft Board”. (It was
already moved to a larger room once.) The rest of [the Dyson
family](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyson) and [Martin
Rees](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Rees), President of the Royal
Society, are among the numerous in attendance. George Dyson gives a
madcap tour of Gödel’s attempts to become a full professor at the
[Institute for Advanced
Study](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institute_for_Advanced_Study) — a
story of endless disappointments which Dyson manages to make quite
funny. It’s brilliant, if you can look past his standard bits of
softheadedness. [Freeman
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_Dyson) pipes in with stories
from his [Neal Stephenson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal_Stephenson)
notes that Gödel went on to work on lonely philosophical projects and
George suggests that the open-ended freedom of the Institute was a bit
of a mistake. [Tim
O’Reilly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_O%27Reilly) wonders if this
is a more general lesson. “I once paid [Larry
Wall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larry_Wall) a salary to do …
basically whatever he wanted for a year,” he said. “I worry that it was
the worst thing that ever happened to the Perl community, because that
was when [Perl 6](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perl_6) turned into what
someone called a performance art project.”

Martha Stewart fills a big room speaking on the Paperless Home. “I may
not look like it,” she says, “but I’m the typical homemaker. I have a
dog, I have a daughter, I have a garden, I have a farm, and I do—or I
did it all myself.” And as a homemaker, she’s convinced homes need to
become computerized. Not too computerized, of course — not like those
crazy folks at MIT who want to have refrigerators that talk and coffee
makers that do the same thing every day. Stewart wants to preserve
traditions too. So she’s going to build tools to organize the
ultra-tedious tasks of life. She’s very bright, hard-headed, and
engaging. “So exhausting,” says one woman upon the session’s conclusion.
“We pay people to do that sort of work.”

[Dalton Conley](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dalton_Conley), the
persecuted sociologist, and his arthack wife [Natalie
Jeremijenko](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natalie_Jeremijenko) gab at
dinner. Dean Kamen gesticulates wildly and talks about watching
beautiful women who bend down to pick things up. Nat Torkington
discusses how O’Reilly refused to censor [his video demonstration of New
Zealand
culture](http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2005/07/why_imovie_shou.html).
[Chris DiBona](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_DiBona) admits he just
works at Google (as a grown-up!) so that he can do science tourism. Theo
Gray shows me the 3D Table of the Elements he printed out using a
lenticular.

The Internet here is really wonky.

[Timo Hannay](http://www.connotea.org/wiki/User:timo) of *Nature*
introduces himself and welcomes me, giving some clues as to why I was
invited. He asks me to explain [Science that
Matters](http://sciencethatmatters.com/), which is an odd situation. My
proud co-author [Jim
Hendler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Hendler) gives a talk on the
future of science publishing. [Paul
Ginsparg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Ginsparg) ducks out to look
at [Howtoons](http://www.howtoons.com/), where [Saul
Griffith](http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~saul/), who is dating Tim’s
daughter [Arwen
O’Reilly](http://www.makezine.com/pub/au/Arwen_O_Reilly), explains that
they try to combine emotional stories to attract girls and action at a
distance (guns, explodey-things, etc.) to attract boys, and telling the
real stories behind discoveries to attract all. Theo Gray talks about
the liability issues involved in publishing [his Popular Science
column](http://www.theodoregray.com/PeriodicTable/PopularScience/index.html).
They made sure to get [Judith
Regan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judith_Regan) as their publisher so
that they could print all sorts of dangerous stuff in their book, only
to have her sacked because of the [O.J. Simpson
debacle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/If_I_Did_It). The conversation
then devolved into explodey-things you can make at home. But [the
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/006076158X) should be out soon. It
looks great.

The WiFi at the conference hotel [adds ads to
pages](http://vancouver.cs.washington.edu/). Wow, is that annoying.

### Sunday

[Eric Bonabeau](http://www.icosystem.com/about_management.htm)
apologized for being rude to me the other day and explained what his
company does — predict human behavior based on modeling cognitive
biases. “Clearly people aren’t rational economic actors,” he explained.
“Just look at [Quinn
Norton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quinn_Norton).”

Someone whose name I didn’t catch talks about finding which genetic
differences increase your risk for getting a particular disease. To get
1x coverage of your genome from [Celera](http://www.celera.com/) costs
only \$100,000 and [23andMe](http://www.23andme.com/) hopes to do
portions of your gene for \$1,000. And just doing portions costs tens of
dollars. You can [browse the genome](http://jimwatsonsequence.cshl.edu/)
of [Jim Watson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_D._Watson) and find
the genetic mutations unique to him. “Perhaps that mutation explains the
*extreme* sexism,” jokes [Paul
Ginsparg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Ginsparg). He shows [a large
study of genetic risk
factsors](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v447/n7145/full/nature05911.html)
and examines Watson to see if he’s at risk.

[I](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz) give my talk. When I
start, about 4 people are there, but I charge ahead and 15 or so more
people show up. I give a demo of [Open
Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/), which most people miss because
they came late. Then we discuss how to open the scientific literature.
Ginsparg says that studies have found that about a third of all papers,
preferentially high-impact papers, are available for free online. We
learn about the ways people keep online bibliographies (including the
Drupal modules involved). And someone else suggests that the [Wellcome
Trust](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wellcome_Trust) just buy Elsevier
and open it up.

[Natalie](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natalie_Jeremijenko) helps
[Dalton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dalton_Conley) set up his computer
for their joint session, in which they make “somewhat opposite
arguments”. (They look much less cool when they’re wearing casual
clothing.) He covers the problems in studying [his book on birth
order](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375713816). He shows that blacks who
were called for the draft are less likely to die in later years (“which
I was shocked about”), which he proposes is because the military is the
most color-blind institution (he suggests the black-white test score gap
is smaller there too). He notes that women’s groups prefer the voting
records of politicians with daughters (for a potential natural
experiment). Roommate lottery finds that each point loss in GPA costs
you .25 points and that roommate drinking is a major influence. But once
the effects are known, people adjust their social behavior. Thus social
scientists are on a treadmill. [Carl
Bergstrom](http://octavia.zoology.washington.edu/) says he sees similar
patterns in evolution — even if the animals are at a draw, you can see
if the genome is under heavy selection.

Natalie talks about her [Urban Space Station
project](http://www.nyu.edu/projects/xdesign/uss/) which uses closed
systems engineering to create safe urban spaces. Attached she’ll have a
lab, one project of which is the Environmental Health Clinic, where
people come with environmental problems and get prescriptions for things
to do to help improve their world. One prescription: [the
greenlight](http://www.nyu.edu/projects/xdesign/greenlight/).

I wanted to get into a fight with Dalton about the metareliability of
these natural experiments but couldn’t find him — he and Natalie were
too busy taking care of two adorable children. At lunch I explained Open
Library to some folks from *Nature*, then got involved in a discussion
making fun of Stephen Wolfram with Chris DiBona and others. I learned
the meaning of my Google New York shirt. Jim McBride told me how much he
liked STM (which I saw on some other peoples’ feed readers) and invited
me up to their abandoned air traffic control tower. Paul Ginsparg
introduced me to [Michael Kurtz](http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/~kurtz/) of
[ADS](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/).

Tim gives the closing speech: he wants to hear what new connections were
made, that’s his metric for success. Afterwards, I get in a great
conversation with Carl Bergstrom who tells me about new features on his
[Eigenfactor](http://eigenfactor.org/) site. Then I bump into [Bjørn
Lomborg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bj%C3%B8rn_Lomborg), who is amazed
I know about the Copenhagen Consensus. He’s been giving copies of his
new book to everyone within throwing distance and stops to amicably
persuade me that we should spend less on stopping global warming.
Incredibly friendly guy — imagine the lead of *Thank You For Smoking*
but a surfer. I talked to a lot of other people but I don’t remember the
details.

The Google people are packing up the camping tents and mats. [Tamara
Munzner](http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~tmm/) demoes some of her visualization
software. She gave me and others a ride. [Ezez
Lieberman](http://www.erez.com/) told me about his work modeling
versions of evolution in which strucural forces cause random drift to
tie with fitness selection and his wife Aviva Presser told me about her
work investigating methilation in gene sequences.

It was an incredible conference. Probably the best I’ve been to
(although that’s not saying much).

### More…

View [photos on Flickr](http://flickr.com/search/?q=scifoo&s=rec).

Also, be sure to check out [my comments on the Foo Camp format and
suggestions for improving it](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/foofix).


Improving the Foo Camp Format
=============================

August 5, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/foofix)

* * * * *

I’ve been to several Foo Camps now and always the system has been
identical: Get a bunch of meeting rooms of varying sizes. Invite a bunch
of the top people you know of in the field. Have them write the
schedule.

When you first arrive, Tim meets and greets at the door, his associates
behind him ask for your name and give you a badge and a t-shirt and a
short form to fill out. The form has your name on it and asks a few
questions about what you do and who they should invite next year and
that sort of thing. Then they take your photo and print it onto the top
of the form and put all the forms up on the wall in a huge display that
you have to be pretty tall to see all of.

You mingle as everyone arrives and then you all cram into a big meeting
room. Tim and his compatriots give an opening address welcoming you to
the conference and explaining the format. Then everyone (all 300 people
or so!) stand up and say their name, affiliation, and three words to
describe themselves (usually going over). Sometimes people shout talk
when they think the person should give a talk. Then Tim says a few more
words and they wheel out huge paper foam boards with the schedule
outline printed on them. It lists the name of the room and the number of
people it approximately holds at the top and the session times on the
side. Then Tim says go and there’s a mad scramble to the boards with
people pushing each other out of the way to write down their preferred
session.

This always struck me as a bit silly for a computer company. The people
I most want to hear — like aging James Randi — can’t exactly push their
way to the front of the crowd. And the people who are convinced that
their topic is the most important for everyone to go to are usually
deathly boring.

How would I do it? First, I would put a few words of description on
people’s badges and wall-cards. Second, I would put the wall-cards
online. (They’re digital photos anyway.) Third, during the name
introductions I’d point a video camera at the person introducing
themselves and project it onto the big screen up front so that people
don’t flip around their chairs and crane to see.

But the main thing I’d do is make people pitch for their sessions. There
are a bunch of different ways to do this, but the one I like best at the
moment (and thus the one I’d try first) is to hand out PRS devices to
the audience (these are little hand-held gadgets that send an IR pulse
to a computer at the front of the room recording a vote on something)
and then have all the people who want to hold a session form a line
going towards the back of the room. Each person in the line gets 30
seconds to pitch their session. If people like it, they press a button
on the PRS and their vote gets recorded. After the pitch, someone enters
the presenter name, the session name, and the estimated length into the
computer recording the votes. (If someone in the line wants to hold a
similar session, they can consult with the person pitching and merge
things.)

Once every session has been pitched, the computer does a constraint
optimization problem to schedule only the most popular sessions in
timeslots with the least conflicts (the computer knows if a person wants
to see both James Randi and Eugenie Scott, so it can try to avoid having
them speak at the same time) and place them in rooms with the
appropriate amount of space. This schedule is printed up and placed on
the website, maybe with a few spots reserved for last-minute changes,
and this is what people follow.

Aside from being a really sexy use of constraint optimization, this
solves a lot of problems: people get a little taste of every session,
the most interesting sessions are scheduled, conflicts (wanting to see
two sessions that are scheduled to the same time) are minimized, rooms
are allocated by audience size instead of by ego size. If you want, you
can even print up a schedule for each participant, with the computer
telling them which is the session they liked most at every timeslot.

Buying [a bunch of PRSs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audience_response)
can’t be that expensive — for comparison, Google purchased two nights at
a hotel for every guest — and you can reuse them every year. If giving
people a chance to pitch their sessions takes too long, you can have
them submit a one paragraph description to a web site and let people
vote on the web site. If this requires too many attendees have laptops
with them, you can have them do this before the conference. But that
requires more foresight than I expect the average attendee has, which is
why I like the PRS system. I’m not sure why O’Reilly sticks to paper.

**Update:** By email, [Peter
Kazanjy](http://thesecomefromtrees.blogspot.com/) suggests another
variation: have people write their session ideas up on cards, put the
cards on the wall, then have everyone make a mark on their top five
ideas, then schedule the cards and rooms based on how many marks they
have.


The Interrupt-Driven Life
=========================

August 20, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/interruptdriven)

* * * * *

After what seemed like years working in the Reddit isolation chamber, I
begun saying yes to all the interesting projects that came my way as
soon as I got out. And there were a lot of interesting projects.

I signed up to build [a comprehensive catalog of every
book](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about), write three books of my own
(since largely abandoned), consult on [a not-for-profit
project](http://bigideas.berkeley.edu/), help build [an encyclopedia of
jobs](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/avgpeople), get [a new
weblog](http://sciencethatmatters.com/) off the ground, [found a
startup](http://jottit.com/), mentor two ambitious Google Summer of Code
projects (stay tuned), build a Gmail clone, write a new online
bookreader, start a career in journalism, [appear in a
documentary](http://www.stealthisfilm.com/Part2/), and research and
co-author [a paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/whowriteswikipedia/).
And that’s not including all the stuff I normally do. I’ve actually been
spending most of my time catching up on my 2000 email backlog, reading a
book a week, following a bunch of weblogs, and falling in love. (Falling
in love takes a shockingly huge amount of time!) Yes, it has been
pointed out to me that I’m insane.

Clearly part of this is that I have some kind of severe psychological
problem (an inability to say no, an inclination toward stress, and a
nasty habit of coping with stress by submerging myself in new projects).
But it’s not completely failing either. Every project has kind of
half-finished. Maybe this is worthless, maybe instead of half-finishing
thirteen projects I should just completely finish one. But it doesn’t
seem obviously stupid — a half-finished project has *some* value
(educational if nothing else) and it seems increasingly likely that some
of them will get finished properly.

So how is it that I’m able to do so many tasks that even I, upon
reflection, can’t see how they’re all getting done? The secret is to be
interrupt-driven. Previously, if I wanted to do something, I’d immerse
myself in that thing. I’d wake up in the morning thinking about the
problem, spend all day either working on it, reading background
materials for it, talking to friends about it, thinking about it in bed
before I went to sleep and then dreaming about it. I’m sure I did much
better work this way: all that thinking and dreaming led to lots of
ideas I wouldn’t have had otherwise. And it was fun, too. Immersing
yourself in a problem can be very enjoyable. (*See* Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi.) But clearly, you can really only work on one problem
at a time this way and it doesn’t leave much room for other people in
your life.

In the new system, for every task I have a partner. And they’re the one
responsible for thinking about it. Perhaps they don’t immerse themselves
in it totally like I sometimes did, but it takes up a substantial
portion of their mental energy. And so, after we hash out the big plan
together at the beginning, they work on it and think about it and worry
about it and when they get stuck or finish a piece or just want to talk
about it, they shoot me an email. Meanwhile, I sit at home and just deal
with these emails, answering questions and solving problems as they come
up.

Now while I think giving people a partner on these projects is really
valuable (I wish I had one on more of my immersive projects) I’ll
readily admit that I’m lousy at it. I’ve been spending too much time ill
and traveling and with people in my life to respond promptly or in
detail. (I’m sorry guys; I’m going to work hard to pare things down and
do better.)

But I think the larger principle is valuable. This is clearly how the
real big-shots “get things done”. Recall the scene in
[*Brazil*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001313) where the harried
executive strolls purposefully (yet aimlessly) through the corridors
with a trail of people waving papers behind him to which he barks either
yes or no. (Reprised in [last week’s
*Psych*](http://www.usanetwork.com/series/psych/theshow/episodeguide/episodes/s2_meatismurder/index.html).)
Of course, when things get that far, it’s rather unclear who’s actually
doing things. As with the political figure whose every minute is
scheduled by their campaign manager or their chief of staff, one begins
to wonder whether the others are working for the boss or whether the
boss is simply working for them. In this way, moving up the corporate
ladder means giving up more and more of your power and freedom.

At some point I plan to go back to the immersive life. I have some big
plans that are just important enough to need that kind of dedication.
But this is the year of Other People. I can’t be everything to everyone,
but I’ll try my best to “get things done”.


Perfectionism
=============

August 31, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectionism)

* * * * *

This may be hard for you to believe, but I’m something of a
perfectionist. I get a special kind of joy out of tweaking every last
detail until it’s just right, making sure each pixel is in its place.
Unfortunately, I’ve never really been able to indulge this desire on any
of my previous projects, either because my skills are too weak (no
matter how much time I spend on it, I’ll never be able to craft a page
like [John Gruber](http://daringfireball.net/) can) or because time is
too short.

At Reddit, for example, we were always rushing-rushing-rushing to get
more done. In [a recent post](http://paulgraham.com/die.html), Paul
Graham suggests startups can make you rich if you simply make sure to
email him once a week. At Reddit we had no such worries: Paul was sure
to email us weekly, sometimes even daily, usually asking why we hadn’t
added any new features to the site lately. (In fairness, it worked, I
suppose.)

When you get that question once a week, you get to try out many
different answers, including questioning the premise. At first I give
the usual low-level excuses: we weren’t feeling well this week, we had
to go to a meeting, Alexis was out of town. Then we started in on more
general principles: afraid of change, distracted by day-to-day fires,
dissatisfaction with the codebase. And once I sent him [*Slate*’s
suggestion that](http://www.slate.com/id/2141797) “the Eccentrics’ own
egotistical indolence has resulted in self-imposed limits to their
skills—at the very least it deprives the world of more of their unique
cultural prognostications.” (He was not amused.)

Paul eventually became convinced that we had written lots of good code
but wouldn’t release it because we were perfectionists. *Knock it off*,
he would tell us. *It’s more important to get it up than to get it
right.* Paul had become convinced that users love seeing new features,
it gave them the impression of an exciting vibrant site.

There is something to this, of course. But I have a contrary proposal:
users love perfectionism. Creating something brilliant is a process of
continual refinement: adding bits where they’re needed, chipping off
others that aren’t, and sanding everything smooth once it’s in place,
then polishing it until it gleams. Do one thing, release it, and don’t
stop releasing improvements until you do it really, really, well.

Adding features is part of this, of course, but not at all the whole
thing. You can’t create a great sculpture just by tossing on more and
more clay.

Meanwhile, even if users can’t immediately see all the subtle details
you’ve added, they begin to add up to a feeling of — if you’re talented
— delight. The software knows where you want to go and has already laid
out the trail. The path is worn smooth and shiny. Everything looks
beautiful along the way. And every day it gets a little bit better.

For my next startup, [Jottit](http://jottit.com/), that’s the plan.


Sweating the Small Stuff
========================

September 16, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sweatsmall)

* * * * *

So [Jottit](http://jottit.com/) has launched, only five months after I
suggested to my friend Simon that we create a website that was just a
big text box people could type stuff into. And there are two ways I look
at it. One is: It took us five months to do *that*? And the other is: We
did that in only five months?

When you look at what the site does, it seems pretty simple. It has few
features, no complex algorithms, little gee-whiz gadgetry. It just takes
your text and puts it on the Web. And considering how often I do that
every day, it seems a bit odd that it took so long to create yet another
way. And then I check the todo list.

[As I’ve said](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectionism), this is a
site I wanted to get every little detail right on. And when you start
sweating the small stuff, it’s frankly incredible just how much of it
there is. Even our trivial site is made up of over two dozen different
screens. Each one of those screens has to be designed to look and work
just right on a wide variety of browsers, with a wide variety of text in
them.

And that’s just making things look good — making them work right is much
harder. Each screen does, on average, five or six different things. And
each of those things can be done under three or four different modes.
Now we’re up to over 500 different things to do, each of which can have
bugs in lots of unthought-of ways. And then, many of these pieces are
exposed to users, who can do whatever they want with them — and do. If
you’re building a site that accepts text from users, you need to think
about something that lets some people just paste stuff from emails,
others write HTML, others play YouTube videos, while others try to
insert malicious text to break things for people.

There are lots of features we want to add to Jottit, but before we do
any of that we want to make what we have work perfectly. And, at the
moment, that means tasks as varied as reporting a bug in a piece of
software we use to its developer, configuring the web server to display
a nicer error message under certain odd conditions, having another
computer monitor the first computer to see if it goes down, figuring out
how to tweak the UI to make certain unclear things clearer to people,
rewriting some of the text on the site to be nicer, creating a new site
to inform our users of updates, making some stuff from our project open
source, fixing stuff in other open source projects, testing the site on
phones and weird browsers, examining an algorithm we use to see if it
needs improvement, and fixing a bug that was just reported by a user.
And those are just the things on *my* todo list!

When you look at it that way, it’s amazing anyone ever builds a website.


Was Rachel Carson a Mass Murderer?
==================================

September 21, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rachelcarson)

* * * * *

A new issue of one of my favorite magazines, *Extra!* is hitting the
streets, with a blurb for my article inside on the cover. When I decided
to get into political journalism, *Extra!* was the first magazine I
turned to. Every other month they issue a brilliant magazine full of
articles which collect and dissect the standard media narratives on a
particular issue and then lay out the real story for you. It’s
invaluable. I think of their work as a good digest of the news: you get
the same misinformation you’d get everywhere else but you also get how
and why it’s misinformation.

For my first piece, I decided to take on the noise machine that’s been
loudly proclaiming in news outlets across the land that the
environmentalist movement, headed by Rachel Carson, is responsible for
the deaths of millions of African babies. Why? Because they discouraged
the use of the noxious pesticide DDT, which was previously used for
controlling the spread of malaria.

For the article, I dug into the science, interviewed the man behind the
misinformation campaign (Roger Bate, a character straight out of *Thank
You For Smoking*), and corrected claims from right-wing think tanks (no,
Rachel Carson did not kill all those babies) and from blogs (no, the
whole misinformation campaign is not funded by the tobacco companies).

You can read the full article [on *Extra!*’s
website](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=3186) or I’ve put up [a
version linking to all my
sources](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/rachelcarson).

An interesting footnote: As I noted above, Roger Bate insisted he had
not been funded by the tobacco companies, as many have claimed. Instead,
he said, their main original funder was the [May and Stanley Smith
Charitable Trust](http://www.adminitrustllc.com/foundations/mssct.htm).
The trust, a \$264 million California foundation started by a mining
magnate, has the mission of “provid[ing] grants to organizations that
serve the needs of children, the elderly, the disabled, and the
disadvantaged.” However, it has also been a major contributor to the
libertarian Cato Institute and George Mason University. Bate says that
its trustee, Luther Avery, didn’t “agree entirely with everything I was
suggesting” but at least thought “the debate was worthy of being
exposed.”

In 2001, Luther Avery passed away, leaving his \$400,000 a year trustee
job to his son, Mark Avery, making Mark the fifth highest-paid
foundation executive in the Bay Area ([*San Francisco Business Times*,
11/14/03](http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2007/06/10/BAG46QCQFB1.DTL)).
But apparently that wasn’t enough — Avery stole \$52 million from the
Foundation and fled to Alaska. ([*San Francisco Chronicle*,
6/10/07](http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/stories/2003/11/17/focus1.html?t=printable)).
This June he pled guilty and now he faces a maximum sentence of 20 years
in prison. ([U.S. Attorney for Alaska,
3/6/07](http://anchorage.fbi.gov/doj/pressrel/2007/moneylaundering030607.htm))


The Joy of Public Speaking
==========================

September 27, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/publicspeaking)

* * * * *

A few months ago I was asked if I wanted to give a talk (via
videoconference) to a technology conference in India. Being
extraordinarily bad at saying no, I said yes. I asked what they wanted
me to talk about and they said I could speak about whatever I liked. I
thought about it for a while and concluded that I should talk about my
life and how I got out of a small town in the middle of the country and
ended up working with famous people. Due to a timing screw up, I didn’t
get to spend as much time on it as I liked, but I did my best. I can put
the draft up if anyone wants it. (**Update:** [Here’s the talk, as
prepared.](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/howtoget))

(My hope was that talking about all these things would give people lots
of different subjects to ask questions on, and then I could go into more
detail about whatever interested people. But oddly, the questions were
instead mostly about the few things I’d left out of the narrative. I
wonder if that means I addressed everything in enough detail that I
answered all their questions or whether I didn’t talk about the things
they actually cared about.)

Giving a talk via videoconference is a painful thing. First, your
disembodied head is looming six feet tall over a room of people. It’s
hard to imagine that’s attractive to anyone other than Big Brother’s
most ardent fan. Second, you have only the blurriest view of the
audience you’re speaking to. Third, you can’t hear whether they’re
laughing or not, because if you get an audio channel then all you hear
is the delayed sound of your own voice repeated back to you — which is
incredibly distracting — so instead all you get is silence. It’s
incredibly difficult to connect with an audience under these conditions.

Still, I did my best, and I’m told it went reasonably well. I sure had
fun — there’s a real buzz you get from speaking before an audience,
whether it’s on the radio or via videocast or in person. Suddenly your
depression and thirst and hunger melt away and you just light up with
enthusiasm and energy. The students who filled the room I was addressing
applauded and thanked me; but in truth I really owe a debt to them.

(**P.S.** If you did attend the talk, I’d love your honest feedback on
how it went. Send me email at [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) or
post a comment. Thanks!)


Dear Colleagues: Orders from China’s Minister of Internet Censorship
====================================================================

October 12, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dearcolleagues)

* * * * *

from “[Journey to the Heart of Internet
Censorship](http://www.rsf.org/article.php3?id_article=23924)”

> The *Xinhua* exclusive “Who is most hurt by the Web?” is available at
> the follow address:
> [http://news.xinhuanet.com/focus/2006-05-08/content\_4494204.htm](http://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=zh-CN&u=http://news.xinhuanet.com/focus/2006-05/08/content_4494204.htm&sa=X&oi=translate&resnum=1&ct=result&prev=/search%3Fq%3D%2522content_4494204%2522%26num%3D30%26hl%3Den%26safe%3Doff).
> It contains many articles, so each site is asked to put a link on its
> home page so that Internet users can read them directly on the Xinhua
> site. This will reduce the amount of work for each site. (9 May 2006)
>
> The website Qianlong has already posted a news report about a change
> in the increase in Beijing taxi fares
> ([http://beijing.qianlong.com/3825/2006/05/19/134@3182655.htm](http://translate.google.com/translate?u=http%3A%2F%2Fbeijing.qianlong.com%2F3825%2F2006%2F05%2F19%2F134%403182655.htm&langpair=zh%7Cen&hl=en&ie=UTF8)).
> All sites are asked to put it in their news section, but not in a
> prominent position, to not put it on their front page, and to stop
> comments on the subject. (19 May 2006)
>
> You are asked not to cover the matter of the real estate auction of
> public land at Dadun Beidingcun, in the Chaoyang district of Beijing.
> (22 May 2006)
>
> Regarding the news report, “After a programming revision, the CCTV
> central television station has decided to stop broadcasting the
> national anthem,” websites must not post it, refer to it or comment on
> it, and those that have already posted it should take it down. Step up
> monitoring of forums, blogs and comments on the news, and suppress
> offensive or insulting reports as quickly as possible. Comply strictly
> with these instructions! (27 May 2006)
>
> A few agitators got residents in Dongzhou (in the southern district of
> Shanwei) to commit an act of vandalism on a windmill and attack the
> police on 6 December. The competent authorities are in the process of
> taking measures to resolve this problem, and the trial of those
> responsible for this unrest is taking place right now. The leading
> news media in Guangdong province and thewebsites Nanfang Xinwen,
> Jinyang, Dayang and Shenzhen Xinwen are currently covering the case
> and will publish articles on this subject on 24 and 25 May. No news
> websites from other provinces should cover the case or post articles
> on the subject. Discussion forums, blogs and comments must not talk
> about the subject. (22 May 2006)
>
> Dear colleagues, regarding the death of a radio presenter while she
> was at the deputy mayor’s home, do not disseminate any reports, do not
> send any new articles, withdraw those that have already been posted on
> the site, and ensure that forums, blogs and messages no longer refer
> to this case. Please reply. (30 May 2006)
>
> Dear colleagues, the Internet has of late been full of articles and
> messages about the death of a Shenzhen engineer, Hu Xinyu, as a result
> of overwork. All sites must stop posting articles on this subject,
> those that have already been posted about it must be removed from the
> site and, finally, forums and blogs must withdraw all articles and
> messages about this case. (17 June 2006)
>
> Regarding the issue of unequal income distribution, please use
> articles from the Central Committee’s main information mouthpieces and
> nothing else. Please do not spread rumours about this matter or
> conduct online polls. Please reinforce monitoring of comments,
> discussion forums and blogs and immediately block any violent or
> obscene message. (28 June 2006)


Area Scientist’s Study Confirms Own Prejudices
==============================================

October 22, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/areascientist)

* * * * *

CAMBRIDGE, MA—In a study published today in the prestigious journal
*Nature*, Harvard professor Dr. Thomas Jacobson, an expert in the field
of physical neuroscience, finds that the gangly cortex, the area of the
brain associated with stumbling, fumbling, and general klutziness, is
smaller in members of the Red Sox sports team than in other major league
baseball players.

The study, entitled “Differential Size Analysis of the Gangly Cortex In
Professional Sports”, was conducted using a technique called Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or fMRI, in which brain activity is observed
on a computer monitor while subjects perform a mental activity. In his
fMRI studies, Dr. Jacobson noted significantly less mental activity in
the gangy cortex of Red Sox players when he asked them to visualize
various aspects of a baseball game.

“Obviously far more research needs to be done,” explained Dr. Jacobson,
“but this evidence does appear to support the popular belief that Red
Sox players are just better than everyone else.”

The study could have major implications for the entire field of physical
neuroscience, which examines how differences in the brain can affect
performance in various types of strenuous physical activity, including
baseball, American football, running the mile, hockey, and the biathlon.

“I haven’t seen the study but I think it’s extremely brave work,” said
former Harvard President Lawrence Summers when asked to comment.
“There’s an academic orthodoxy of political correctness that says you
shouldn’t inquire too much into the differences between sports teams.
Well, Dr. Jacobson has thrown that out the window and science is better
off for it.”

The study appears in the July 27th issue of *Nature*, along with new
research showing that [eating chocolate is good for your
heart](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/in_depth/sci_tech/2001/glasgow_2001/1521982.stm),
[Jews are just smarter than everyone
else](http://www.seedmagazine.com/news/2005/12/jews_on_jews_jews_are_great.php),
[semen makes women
happier](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/2067223.stm), and [all women
are
bisexual](http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2003/06/030613075252.htm).
A new study showing that having sex with scientists [is associated
with](http://cr.yp.to/postpropter.html) a 20-point increase [in
IQ](http://bactra.org/weblog/523.html) is expected to be released soon.


How to Build Decent Productivity Software
=========================================

October 29, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/decenttodo)

* * * * *

These days it seems like everyone is making productivity software —
software that helps you manage all the the things you need to get done.
Yet all of them seem to be missing some basic pieces. A productivity
application has two jobs: remembering everything you need to do and
getting you to do it. The second is necessary because without it, you’ll
put all your tasks in the application and then never do them. The first
is necessary because otherwise the application will have no idea what to
tell you to do.

I think the ideal piece of productivity software would be like having a
great assistant or a campaign manager: someone who intimately knows all
aspects of your life’s todo lists and schedules and wasn’t afraid of
saying you had to wrap this meeting up because you promised the kids
you’d be home at 5 to take them to the game. Judged against this
standard, present productivity software is woefully lacking — it’s
usually not much more than a glorified todo list.

**Remembering everything:** Most software lets you store the classical
todo list items: call Jon back, finish report, buy toy for
kids.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ Some systems even branch out into vaguer life goal
stuff: spend time with family, become accomplished novelist, learn more
about history. But that’s about it.

But most people also have tasks in their project management software
(fix this bug), various calendar-style events (lunch with Jon, catch
plane), and a vast quantity of email (answer Jon’s question, fix the
frobnitz and report back to Bob, etc.) Yet no one seems to have dared to
integrate their software with a calendar, email client, or even bug
tracking software.

Since it’s unlikely anyone writing productivity software is also going
to write an email client, a calendar, and a bug tracker (although it
would be nice), I’ll settle for having support for plugins that import
tasks and events from these various other apps. It has to be very simple
to upload your whole life to your todo app.

**Getting you to do stuff:** The best I’ve seen is some kind of
filtering in which the software lets you only look at tasks that can be
done in 5 minutes while on a train. But if you’re the kind of person
who’s dysfunctional enough to need productivity software, simply having
a big list of tasks probably isn’t going to help you much. (I can write
a big list of tasks in Notepad.) Instead, the software should be
proactive about getting you to do stuff, like telling you to quit
goofing off and get ready for that big deadline you have tomorrow or to
hurry up and answer that urgent email from yesterday.

How does it do this? First, it needs to know what’s important. After you
import your life it should let you walk through and triage it all: look
at each one and decide how important it is (or whether it’s already
done). I’ve written a program to do this just for my mail and it’s been
invaluable — within a couple hours a morass of three thousand messages
turned into a neatly labeled set of piles ordered by importance.
Similarly, it can turn a tall pile of assorted todos into the beginnings
of an action plan.

Then comes the crucial part: it tells you what to do. I’m not demanding
anything fancy, like a robot dog that follows you around and barks
orders (although that might be nice). I’m just saying provide a little
pop-up window with a suggested next task. Psychologically, it’s easy to
ignore a long todo list. In fact, long todo lists are depressing and
make you want to look away. But a simple suggestion about one particular
thing to do next is much harder to dismiss.

Of course, the suggestions have to be good. The software would generate
them by taking into account everything it knows about your tasks and
calendar today. And if you still don’t like the suggestion, you tell the
program you can’t do it because…:

-   that’ll take too long (adds a time estimate to the task; used to
    make sure the task can be done before the next event on the
    calendar)
-   that’s not very important (adds a priority to the task; used to sort
    by importance)
-   I can’t do that here (adds a physical context to the task, like
    being in a certain place; used to find tasks you can do in your
    current context)
-   I can’t do that yet (adds a dependency; dependencies can then be
    checked occasionally to see if they’ve been finished yet)
-   I already did that (marks as done)
-   that’s not due for a while (adds a due date; used to make sure
    things get done before their deadlines)

and so on. Ideally, the system would be well-informed and smart enough
that you could trust its predictions. But even if it wasn’t perfect,
just suggesting tasks in order of priority would likely be a vast
improvement over the whimsical system used by most people in need of
productivity software. It’s hard to imagine such a tool wouldn’t be a
godsend.

*Aaron Swartz has too large of a todo list to write this program by
himself, but if you’re interested in working on it he’d love to help.
Email him at [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com)*

(**Postscript:** Dearest readers, telling me that your favorite
glorified todo list has an API that allows me write all the importers I
want as well as write the task suggestion system I described is not an
answer. My point is that todo lists should *have* these features; not
that they should allow me to write them.)

* * * * *

1.  Most of the classical productivity guides are aimed at middle
    managers whose lives, as far as we can tell from the examples,
    consist of calling people, finishing reports, and placating their
    families. Who am I to break with tradition? [↩](#fnref:fn1)




Bubble City: Preface
====================

October 31, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity)

* * * * *

November is National Novel Writing Month, or NaNoWriMo. The idea, as far
as I can discern, is that more people ought to be writing novels. But
whether this is for us or them is not clear.

Novels have an odd place in our culture. They can be capital-L
Literature, as in the Great American Novel. Or they can be
entertainment, as in romance or mystery novels. Or, and perhaps best,
they can capture the essence of a place or time by using it as the
backdrop for a story.

In this way, a novel is disguised memoir, as anyone who is friends with
a novelist can readily discern. And, like a memoir, writing them can be
therapeutic, exorcising a writer’s demons, while hopefully being more
entertaining.

Over the next month I will be serializing a novel, *Bubble City*, in
this space, one chapter every day. NaNoWriMo requires novels be at least
50,000 words in length and thirty days hath November, so I’ll aim for
1666 words a day, although if I get lazy I may make some days shorter if
I go over on previous ones.

There are lots of reasons not to read it: I have no experience writing
long-form fiction, I will be writing this live and thus bound to errors
I make in previous chapters, you will undoubtedly be negatively
portrayed in it, I have not really planned this out, and I have no great
things to say. Each post’s title will begin with “Bubble City:” so you
can easily ignore them.

That said, if you want to read a yarn about the denizens of San
Francisco startups, the power they presume to have over the world, and
what happens when programmers get in over their heads, stay tuned.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter One](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity1)


Bubble City: Chapter 1
======================

November 1, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity1)

* * * * *

Tick. Slip off backpack, place on table, slide out laptop, place in bin.
Take out wallet, take out cell phone, take out loose change, place in
bin. Face straight forward, wait for signal, walk through slowly,
collect stuff. Tock. Jason did not waste time.

At the gate he read a magazine, on the plane he read a book, on the bus
he checked his email. He went through familiar motions as if he had cut
from them each unnecessary effort. He analyzed every moment of his life
with an unsparing critical eye. He walked down hallways with purposeful
strides — well, as purposeful as one can be if one is a gangly teenager
attempting to carry a duffle bag bigger than oneself.

The woman behind the glass yelled at him as he tried to squeeze the
duffle bag through the turnstile. The bus dropped him off five city
blocks from his destination. His destination was closed and locked and
empty and unfeeling and he was trapped alone carrying everything he
owned in a city he barely knew.

A cab sped by.

* * * * *

Trent stood up from his desk. Sometimes he did that. He wasn’t going
anywhere or signaling something. He just liked standing up and looking
out over all that he surveyed. He savored the feeling of being at the
pinnacle of achievement. He didn’t think he’d ever get tired of that
feeling.

Over there was the team he’d hired away from Microsoft with promises of
a looser corporate culture and better weather. And over there, the
startup he’d acquired after reading about them in one of the industry
weblogs—he couldn’t recall which—and after hardball negotiations bought
them and brought them here. And, over there, the UI designer, helping
all the programmers to make their code more friendly. He watched them
all working as one smooth harmonious unit.

He sat back down and looked over the day’s schedule. First, a staff
meeting. He flicked through his PowerPoint one last time and then headed
to the conference room to set up the projector. At 9:00 the computers of
every employee simultaneously chimed with an on-screen alert announcing
that a meeting was supposed to begin. But, as usual, the programmers
were so deeply engrossed in their work that they didn’t even hear the
bell. “Staff meeting,” he shouted, but still no one moved. Oh, those
programmers. How dedicated!

He walked around the cubicles, pulling headphones off ears to make sure
everyone got the news. They got up and followed him to the conference
room. God, programmers have such odd dazed looks and slackened jaws.
Spending that much time in front of a screen really must be bad for your
expression.

Once everyone was settled in the conference room, he flipped to the
first slide. “25,000” it proclaimed in white block letters against a
stark black background. “25,000” he said out loud, just to hammer the
point home. “We have to do better,” he said.

“Now I know all of you are working hard. Don’t think I don’t see the way
you all hurry back from lunch exactly at 1 and get back into the groove,
typing furiously and shouting.” He heard some muffled noises from the
back of the room. He smiled; they thought he didn’t notice.

“But 25,00 is just not enough. I want 30,000. Alright. The other piece
of news is that we’ve got a new guy coming in today. He’s one of the top
students from this year’s class at MIT, so I’m sure he’ll be an amazing
addition to the team. I hope you’ll all help him get acquainted with the
system.”

“OK, I guess that’s it. Now back to work!” he shouted, and laughed. He
loved to keep the mood light.

Back at his desk, he checked the day’s schedule. Some phone calls, then
a lunch meeting, then a bit of a break so he could put the finishing
touches on his spreadsheets, then one more meeting ending right at 5 so
he could race out the door to his parked car and head home to his loving
wife.

* * * * *

Lazy day. Sarah slid out of bed and tossed on a tshirt and some panties.
Her bare feet tip-toed across the wooden floor as she rummaged around
the kitchen for something that might be made into a kind of breakfast.
Some granola over here. A bit of fruit over there. Just add a bowl and a
spoon and you’re done.

She ate it at the kitchen counter while flicking through the day’s email
on her laptop: George, John, Tom, James, Jim — delete, delete, delete,
delete, delete. Sigh, no mail again. She checked a couple blogs,
splashed some water on her face, threw on pants, and grabbed her
skateboard, tossing it out the window. Her bare feet soon followed. She
didn’t wear shoes.

Dodging traffic on Mission Street ought to be some kind of videogame.
Swerving past this street vendor only to dive in front of that old man’s
cart, then around again past the giggling children and ducking under the
flailing arms of their screaming parents. And that was just the
sidewalk.

At the office she hurried past the programmer cubicles, their windows
streaming last night’s YouTube highlights and some networked videogames
and the requisite bluster of the Wayne Darnus show. She slid down into
her chair and plotted yet another day of how she was going to persuade
the programmers to stop making their interfaces so horrible. In other
words, another day of dealing with unceasing, uncomprehending rejection.

* * * * *

Wayne woke up happy, as he always did. Then he sat down at his computer
to read the news. One hand clicked through each headline, his blood
pressure rising at each fresh outrage, while the other hand grabbed
handfuls of cereal from the box he kept by the side of his desk. As he
crunched through the dry cereal, its sharp edges lacerating his gums, he
felt his anger turn to rage until he could no longer contain himself. So
he turned on his camera.

He popped open the recording software, making sure he got his nose
squarely in its frame, his face so close that spittle would land on the
lens. In a world where every teenage kid could stream a live feed of
himself having sex to millions, only the most aggressive vlogcasters
survived. Wayne was no dummy. He didn’t get to be the number seven blog
in the TechnoScene rankings by sitting back and offering his *opinions*.
No. This was war and every show a battle.

Today’s enemy? Newsflip, one of the crummy little online news aggregator
sites, which was threatening to write him out of the history books by
dumping the technology he’d single-handedly invented, news notation
analysis (NNA), and going with some upstart competitor that didn’t even
bother to have an acronym for a name. Sure, Newsflip was a tiny site in
the scheme of things, but if it switched it would set a dangerous
precedent.

He pressed the button and watched the light go green. “Goooooood
morning,” he said, with his best attempt at the cheerful voice that
Californians love. “I was *seriously* disheartened to hear about some
dangerous changes afoot at Newsflip. The company plans to abandon their
users by abandoning their support for NNA. Now longtime viewers will
remember how hard we fought to get NNA adopted. And you won: now NNA is
used on every major news site, is built into Windows and Macs, forms the
basis of the modern online news ecosystem.

“Newsflip wants to turn their back on all that by getting rid of NNA.
They claim they’re doing it to make things simpler for users. But how is
it simpler for users to get rid of one of the key features that they
depend on?

“But frankly, I think the biggest loser if this move goes forward will
be Newsflip. Now, I’m not saying that all of you should go out and
boycott Newsflip, but as users I do think you should make your opinions
heard. I’ve always said, technology is about the user. Without you,
there’d be no technology business. I think Newsflip might need to be
reminded of that.”

He pressed the button again and the light blinked off. There. That ought
to show them.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity2)


Bubble City: Chapter 2
======================

November 2, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity2)

* * * * *

Downtown San Francisco is a world of carefully-gridded streets and
looming skyscrapers, but hidden behind a gas station on Third is a place
that almost looks like another world. The sun shines brightly upon a
park with green grass and tall shady trees and vibrant swings with
children. The park is an oval and the perimeter is lined with small,
pastel-colored buildings. Here and there are a smattering of small cafes
and restaurants. And the other buildings are filled with startups.
Twitter here. Adaptive Path there. Even Yahoo, when it wanted to
encourage its employees to be more startup-y, opened up an office in the
neighborhood. Sit on the grass and chances are you’ll sit near a friend
from another company or bump into them in line at a cafe. The place
crawls with companies and back on the street, surveying the scene with a
distant but watchful eye, lie the journalists, whose publications cover
with awe the rumblings of those below. It was here that Newsflip made
its home.

Jason entered the building expecting to be greeted warmly by the relaxed
startup world. Instead, the scene he entered was utter chaos. “Get me
CNN!” shouted a man at the front of the room, apparently to no one in
particular. Others buzzed at their desks, shouting to one another,
shouting at their phones, shouting at their computers, shouting at their
coffee mugs. One guy just seemed to keep spinning around in his chair
for no reason in particular.

Jason stood around surveying the scene for a moment until a man standing
up motioned for him to come over. “What do you mean we can’t get CNN?”
he shouted into his phone. “This is America.” He placed his hand over
the phone and looked down. “You must be Jason,” he said. “Uh, yes, sir.
Are you—” “Goddamn it, I don’t care if you have to *buy* it, I want a 5
minute segment on Wolf Blitzer.” He covered the phone again. “It’s great
to have you on the team, son.” Jason thought this was a bit fast to be
adopted as a son, but didn’t feel like he could press the point.

“Look I don’t have time for this shit,” he suddenly barked. “Just get me
on CNN.” He slammed the phone down, sat down on the side of the desk,
and adopted an avuncular tone. “Let me tell you a little story,” he
said. “Uh, OK,” Jason said, but the man talked right over him.

“One day, not long after I graduated college, I was waiting at a bus
stop. And sitting there on the seat beside me was a magazine, opened to
an article about a newspaper. So I read the article and it just took my
breath away. Took my breath away. And I said to myself, ‘Self, one day
you’re going to be running a newspaper like that.’ Well, it took me
twenty years to do it, but here I am. Sure, technically we don’t use
paper, but we print news all the same, right? Anyway, isn’t that
amazing?”

Jason just smiled and nodded.

“Of course, I didn’t get there just by sitting back and watching. No,
sir. I got there by joining someone else’s startup, seeing how it was
done, and then using what I’d learned to turn around and start a new
company to destroy their main product. Heh, heh. Well, I guess what I’m
saying is that I better keep an eye out on you. Better keep an eye out
on you.”

Jason looked a bit worried. And puzzled.

“Anyway, as you can see things are a bit crazy around here.” He waved
his arm past the still-chaotic room. “So I better get back to work. But
I’m sure you’ll settle in fine — and if there’s any trouble you just let
me know. Good luck!” he added and then picked up the phone again and
started screaming without even dialing.

Looking for his desk, Jason wandered around the office for a bit, past
the spinning, screaming, slacking employees, until he found an unused
desk over in a corner. There was a memo on it, addressed to him,
reminding him of the company’s copyright and confidentiality commitments
that he’d signed, which he promptly tossed in the trash.

He sat down and began inventorying the other contents of the desk: a
flat screen monitor, a dual-processor tower, an IP phone, a keyboard, a
mo—. He noticed a tugging at his leg and looked down. He sprang back.
There was a girl beneath his desk. “Sssssssh!” she whispered and
motioned for him to come towards her. Slowly and awkwardly, he crouched
down and crawled towards the girl. She pulled him under the desk with
her and extended her hand.

“Hi, I’m Sarah,” she said. He shook it. “Hi, I’m, uh, Jason.” “Hey,
Jason! Welcome aboard the team.” “So, why are we down here?” “Because
it’s crazy up there, silly. Why get involved in all that screaming mess
when we can just slip off in the storm and hang out by ourselves?” “I
guess. What’s all the fuss about, though?” “Oh, just some tech pissing
contest. Some blowhard with a webcam doesn’t like some tech decision
some intern made and now everybody’s going DEFCON 5.” “Actually, DEFCON
5 is the lowest level of military activation. I think you probably mean
DEFCON 3.” She just looked at him. He looked back and realized he should
probably shut up.

“So Sarah, what do you do here?” he ventured. “I’m in charge of training
newbies, silly,” she said, and ruffled his hair. “Catch me if you can!”
she added, before darting out from under the desk and running across the
office. Jason followed in pursuit.

She ran to the middle of the roll of desks, then crouched down and
rolled under one of them to the next row. Jason kept running to the end
of the row to try to head her off at the pass, doing his best to dodge
the spinning chairs and thrown balls that were filling the office. Sarah
made a bee-line for the door, stopping only to grab the skateboard lying
next to it, which she used to skitter down the stairwell. Jason hopped
the whole flight after her.

Reaching the bottom, she sped out the door just as an overweight man was
opening it to enter. He jumped out of the way and screwed up his face in
anger. “Don’t you know who I am?” he shouted down the street at her.
“Nope,” replied Jason, running out the door after her.

On the street, she skateboarded around baby strollers, old people, and
dazed-looking hipsters like a pro, while Jason was jogging as fast as he
could just to keep up. She jumped lights right before traffic, took
bizarre shortcuts and side-streets, and occasionally turned back to
laugh at him. After a couple blocks of this she jumped up onto a railing
and headed into a park. The next thing Jason knew she was halfway up a
tree in the middle of a park surrounded by shopping malls and people.
Jason hadn’t come this far just to give up at a tree, so he scurried up
afterwards, finding himself balanced precariously on a branch. Once
again he found himself in a secluded spot surrounded by people, sitting
alone, facing Sarah.

“Not bad, kid,” she said.

* * * * *

Wayne ambled in and pressed the button for the elevator. Once he got to
the office Trent spotted him at the door and, screaming a few last words
into his phone before slamming it down, headed over and led Wayne into a
conference room. The office got silent as he walked by. “Fans!,” he
thought.

Trent shut the door behind him. “Wayne, Wayne, Wayne, so good to see
you!” “Good to see you too, Trent! What’s it been? A couple years?”
“Yeah, must have been that ETech two years ago. The one with that Bezos
keynote.” Wayne laughed. “How could I forget?”

“Anyway, as I’m sure you know I invited you here because we were all
very hurt by your comments on your show yesterday.” “Oh, that silly
thing? Well I certainly hope no one was too offended. I was just sharing
some concerns I had with the changes you were making. That’s all.” “If
you had concerns you should have just taken them to us. My door is
always open to you. You know that.”

Wayne looked at him. “Actually, I don’t. Let’s be frank here. If I try
to get an appointment with any startup in this city they push me off on
the calendar and jerk me around until three months have gone by and
they’ve closed their B round of funding and the VCs have hired a
professional public relations team to professionally sit and ignore
comments from people like me. But if I talk about it on my show I get
ushered into your conference room the next morning. So let’s not play
dumb here. You know as well as I how this game works.”

“Wayne, Wayne, Wayne,” trent said shaking his head. “What do you want?
Do you want us to use this NNA thing? Done! You got it. It doesn’t make
any difference to me. I don’t even know what the hell the thing does.
Look, what do you need from us? Is that all?”

“Thanks, Trent. You’re a sweetheart. That’d be great.” “Well I’m glad we
could settle this so easily. You know, Wayne, if you ever need anything
else, just give me a ring. My door is always open. Hell, I don’t even
have a door! Heh, heh.” “Of course, Trent. Thanks so much.” “Here, let
me see you out.”

Trent ushered Wayne to the door. “Oh, there is one more thing,” Wayne
added. “Sure, what is it?” Trent asked. “Well, I’ve just been noticing
in my referer logs that traffic from Newsflip has been dropping sharply
lately.” “Really? I had no idea,” Trent replied. “Now I’m not asking for
any special treatment here.” “Mo, goodness no, of course not.” “But if
you guys could just look into the anomaly. Try to figure out what could
be going haywire. That would be great.” “Oh, of course Wayne. I’ll put
my top guy on it.” “Thanks so much, Trent. Let’s keep in touch.”
“Let’s.”

* * * * *

All day, people came back and forth through Yerba Buena Park, while
Jason and Sarah hung from the branches above their heads, talking.
Indeed, hours passed before Jason even thought to consult his watch.
Jason was used to seeing other people as a necessary evil: curiosity and
courtesy were behaviors he had worked hard to learn to imitate so that
others didn’t find him too strange, but he did his best to make sure
other people took no more than a couple hours of his time.

Sarah was different. She was the only person he’d ever talked to who
made him feel completely relaxed in his own skin. He didn’t have to
worry about being someone else or trying to be interesting or checking
the time. They just talked and talked and laughed and laughed.

Sarah looked up at the sun overhead where it hung suspended above the
park. “Hey, let’s go grab some lunch she said,” and swung down, branch
to branch, before leaping to the ground. Jason followed, smiling.

* * * * *

Wayne got back in front of the camera and pressed the button.

“Alright, for today’s Internet Hero segment, where I keep an eye out for
the other people who are keeping an eye out for you. I’d like to give a
big shout-out to one of my favorite Internet startups, Newsflip. I had a
great conversation today with Newsflip’s CEO, Trent Rayburn, and he told
me a bit about Newsflip’s philosophy and strategy and I have to say, I’m
100% on board.”

“There are a lot of companies out there that just don’t understand
users. They think you, the people who make their companies run, are just
people to be spat on and squeezed for cash. Not at Newsflip. There’s a
company that puts users first. And I salute them for it. So that’s
today’s Internet Hero: Newsflip.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity3)


Bubble City: Chapter 3
======================

November 3, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity3)

* * * * *

The next day was a Saturday but by the following Monday things had
calmed down and Jason could finally begin real work.

He began, as he always did, by trying to figure out the system. You
couldn’t really work on something until you really *grokked* it:
understood all the pieces and how they interacted and why they were
there. If you didn’t get that, then you could spend days trying to fix
one piece, only to discover all your effort was wasted because your
fixes would be ineffective as long as another part was in place.

He first checked out a copy of the code, staring at the list of
thousands of files on his screen, trying to figure out where to start.
As usual, nobody had bothered to write down anything explaining things.
So he began opening pieces up, finding that they referenced other
sections and bouncing from section to section until the big picture
became clearer.

By the end of the day, he felt he had a pretty solid understanding of
how the whole thing worked. Not how people *thought* it worked, but how
it actually did — what the code that actually ran the system said.

* * * * *

“What the hell were they thinking?” Sarah thought, as she sat staring at
yet another of the braindead interfaces the programmers had come up
with. She knew they had no contact with other humans but honestly
sometimes she didn’t understand why they couldn’t even figure out basic
principles of decent design.

She started, as she always did, by trying to figure out the system. She
looked at the various pieces of the interface and tried to figure out
the different concepts they were manipulating. Programmers always
thought of it in terms of how the system was built, but the users had no
idea how the system was built and couldn’t cares.

You had to think of it from their perspective: what was it they wanted
to do, what were the things they encountered along the way, and how
could you make sure they felt like they were in control of those things?

And then, once you figured all that out, how did you beat it through the
heads of the programmers?

* * * * *

Trent’s calendar warned him of an impending VC meeting. Running an
office like this — servers, employees, big looming screens overhead —
wasn’t cheap. And since the site didn’t run ads or have a revenue
stream, the only way to keep the lights on was to trot back to the VCs
every six months with some impressive charts and some pleas for cash.

He looked through the names of the people he was meeting with and then
jumped over to scan their blogs. To pitch to people you really had to
understand them. Figure out what made them tick. Everyone required a
different pitch and Trent knew exactly how to reshape it for them, just
as Newsflip reshaped a series of links to meet the reader’s desires.

He remembered what companies they’d previously invested on, which ones
had done well, what they’d mentioned their kids were into, what gadgets
they enjoyed, and — most importantly — how Trent had cut them favors in
the past. This town ran on that sort of thing.

* * * * *

High above the Newsflip offices loomed a series of big screens with a
rapidly-scrolling list of links. The lists were generated by a series of
crawlers which ran, 24/7, around various weblogs and social bookmarking
sites. Every time someone posted a new link to their blog, or bookmarked
something on del.icio.us, or voted for it on Digg, it saw it and noted
it. Then another program took these triples (jon, del.icio.us
bookmarked, lessig.org) and scoured them for patterns. Were a group of
people all bookmarking lessig.org today? Are a dozen blogs all linking
to a particular YouTube video?

It then used these patterns to cluster users into groups. Jon, Jim, and
Jill all like YouTube videos about cats. Sal, Sue, and Sam all like
newspaper articles about copyright.

And that way, when it saw a new YouTube video about cats, or a new
newspaper article about copyright, it could make a guess at who would
like it. And that combination of guesses made up the Newsflip front
page.

When you visited Newsflip for the first time, it’d show you a bunch of
things that were widely liked by different groups of people. Maybe the
top link today about music and sports and technology and business. And
when you clicked the one you liked the most — let’s say music — it’d
show you ten more stories from the various subgroups of music. In just a
couple clicks — music, pop, indie, guitar-based — it’d have you figured
out and know a great deal more about which kind of links to send your
way.

From then on, every time you visited the site it would use this
knowledge to send you links it thought you might like. It would also
show you a few random popular links as well, just to make sure it wasn’t
missing out on any other odd tastes you had. So every time you visited
Newsflip it served you up a couple dozen stories it thought that you
would like. (Of course, it also noted down which stories you clicked on
and said you liked, right along with the links and bookmarks.)

At the heart of it was the pattern-finding system that noticed when
groups of people seemed to be doing something. It was based on a system
called Notated News Analysis (NNA) which had been invented ages ago by
some old guy who turned it into a public standard. Now dozens of sites,
including Newsflip, used it to try to generate the best recommendations
about what to see on the Internet.

* * * * *

Samuel scrolled through his notes one last time before the meeting. Soon
people would be filing into the conference room and he couldn’t afford
to seem unprepared in front of them. He visualized himself standing in
front of the room, walking through the bullet points, smoothly ordering
the meeting, parrying questions, parceling out action items, dodging
barbs. He was ready.

People filed in, pulled out their laptops, and engaged in the
pre-meeting chit-chat; the final moment of levity before the meeting’s
dreadfully boring waste of time. Finally, he tapped on the table for
order.

“Hey everyone, welcome back to the monday morning evangelism team
coordination meeting. As usual, we’ll go around the table and have each
team bring us up to date on their activities. I’ll start.”

“So this week I gave a keynote at OSCON and encouraged developers to use
Google Platform to host their apps. My main points were: 1) that this
was a new era of openness here at Google, where we were handing control
of our computers to the community; 2) that we had by far the most
powerful and scalable system for deployment; and 3) that we were always
on the lookout for the developers of the next hot application and that
users of Google Platform would be fast-tracked with the acquisition
team.”

“Alright, HR?”

“So this week we did a booth at the Ubuntu conference. These things
continue to be an amazing value for us. The booth costs a pittance, we
managed to snag four top developers out of it (gave them the usual
bullshit about the Goog’s commitment to open source), and we lined them
up in job slots that are definitely going to take them out of the open
source world for a while.”

“Great work! Standards?”

“Well, the big news continues to be NNA. Newsflip, a small startup up in
San Francisco, was trying to switch away from it but, of all things,
*Wayne Darnus* turned the firehose on them and managed to talk them out
of it. So now—”

“Wait, Wayne Darnus?” “Yup!” “What’s his angle?” “Well, you know, he
says he invented NNA so anything that takes attention away from it just
makes him less important.” Samuel broke out laughing. “Oh god, that’s
perfect. So what did he do?” “Oh, you know, the usual. Did a piece on
how he was oh-so-concerned about all the poor users who would be hurt by
the switch.” Samuel couldn’t stop giggling. “Oh my god,” he said. “This
is just too perfect.” “Yeah, the guy’s basically doing our job for us.”

“Yeah, exactly. Hey, that gives me an idea. Do you have Wayne’s number?”
“His phone number?” “Yeah.” “Uh, sure, I’ve got it here somewhere. OK,
510-555-2414.” Samuel picked up the phone and dialed it, repeating the
numbers back as he did. He made a shushing sound and set it on
speakerphone.

“Hello?” came the gruff voice at the other end. “Wayne! Good to hear
you. Hey, this is Samuel Boxton over at Google Evangelism.” “Google?
Hey, I didn’t say *anything* about Google on today’s show. That stuff I
said wasn’t targeted you at all.”

“No, no, Wayne, I’m not calling to *complain*; I’m calling to
*congratulate*.” “Congratulate? Congratulate what?” “Congratulate *you*,
silly. On the great job you did with Newsflip. That was a real act of
generous diplomacy you did there.” “Oh, uh, well, I guess it was.
Thanks. But why does Google care about something like that?”

“Don’t be silly, Wayne. At Google we’re just like you — looking out for
the users. Trying to make the best Web experience for everyone. We’re
really 100% on the same page there.” “Um, yeah then, I suppose we are.”
“You know, it’s a shame that we’ve never managed to collaborate before.
Our interests are so aligned that it would really be great if we could
figure out some way to work together.” “What do you mean? Do you have
some kind of joint project in mind?”

“No, not exactly, Wayne. I was thinking more some kind of funding
arrangement.” “Funding arrangement,” Wayne repeated. “Yes. Now hear me
out: what if we funded The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities?”
“The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities. I like the sound of that.”
“I thought you would. Now we’ll give you a startup grant to help you
establish and operate the center, which will keep on doing the good work
you’re doing to promote NNA.” “Um, OK.” “To start with, I was thinking
of an initial grant of around three million dollars.” Wayne coughed
suddenly but soon regained his composure. “Um, yes, well, I think that
should be able to cover our initial operations.”

“Perfect. There’s just one more catch.” “Oh,” Wayne said, his voice
falling a bit. “What?” “Well, here at Google we don’t want to make a big
show about how we’re helping the Web. So it’s essential our donation
remain anonymous.” “Anonymous?” “Yeah, you know how whenever you go to a
museum or something like that it always says ‘Generous donations by
anonymous’? That’s just how it works in philanthropy.” “Oh, I see,”
Wayne said.

“So we’ll be doing it exactly like that. The actual money will be
donated to you by a shell corporation called Rinaldi Tile, Inc. which we
use for these kinds of special projects and we’ll have you sign a
confidentiality agreement prohibiting you from disclosing the real
source. You know, all the usual stuff.” “Uh huh,” Wayne said, a bit
skeptically. “And then we’ll send you the three million dollars.”
“Sounds great!” Wayne said quickly “Where do I sign?” “I’ll have my
assistant send over the papers in just a little bit.” “Perfect.” “Been a
pleasure working with you. See you later.” “Bye.”

Samuel hung up the phone and saw smiling faces around the conference
table. He smiled back and got up to take a mock bow. The room applauded.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity4)


Bubble City: Chapter 4
======================

November 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity4)

* * * * *

“How’s it going, kiddo?” They’d already gotten to kiddo? Jason tried to
blend in with his chair. “Helllo, kiddo? You in there?” Trent slapped
him on the back of the head. Jason felt a sharp pain and decided to give
up on the ruse. “Uh, yes, sir. Or at least I have been for the past
couple decades.” “Ahh, a kidder. Love that.”

“Anyway, just wanted to check in, see how you were doing, all that good
boss stuff, you know?” “Ah, of course, sir. Everything’s going great.
The, uh, other team members”—he looked at Sarah—“have been really
helpful and, uh, yeah, just everything is going really well, I guess.”
“Glad to hear it,” Trent said.

“You know,” Trent said, before pausing a moment to look around Jason’s
desk, “uh, Jason, that Newsflip isn’t just another one of those startups
out to make a quick buck. We have a noble mission. For decades, people
have gotten their news from a handful of conglomerates who’ve bought
each other up so many times that they can’t tell their CEO from their HR
department. And news is important. Without the news, you wouldn’t have
any idea who won the latest sports game or why we’re invading Iran.”
“We’re invading Iran again?” Jason asked. “Anyway, I just want you to
know that this is a company that makes a difference.” “I see, so we’re a
company that’s out for a quick buck while thinking we’re helping the
world.” “Exactly,” Trent said. “Anyway, I’ve got another dozen meetings,
so I better head off, but just give me a ring if you need me.” “Of
course,” Jason said.

Jason went back to his screen and decided to actually read through
Newsflip to see this great new democratizing force, telling people about
the reasons we were invading Iran. The top 5? “Waking Up During
Surgery”, “It’s Official: Tom Cruise Has Sucked the Life out of Katie
Holmes”, “Excited Pug Pees on Cameraman”, “5 Stupid Things You Said to
Her”, and “Can Medical Marijuana Cost You Your Kid?” Jason sighed.

Jason thought of himself as a rather sophisticated person, but
Newsflip’s recommender certainly didn’t seem to think so. He wondered
how many other people got the same sort of treatment. So he opened up a
raw connection to the database and did a query. Tens of thousands of
people were seeing the story about dogs peeing. Odd, he thought.

He needed someone to bounce things off of, so he called the best person
he knew for that sort of thing: Eric. Eric was brilliant. In the first
bubble, he’d made millions as a teenager who’d managed to persuade some
VCs to let him run a web news company. But the experience had burned him
out badly and now he mostly slunk around his apartment in San Francisco
and watched TV. Still, he knew this stuff better than anyone. Jason gave
him a call.

“Hey, Eric, you got a moment?” “Yeah, not like I’m doing anything else.”
“You ever read Newsflip?” “Look, Jason, I love you and all, but I’m not
going to start using some website just because you work there. The news
is a complete waste of ti—” “Yeah, yeah, I know. I read your blog,
dude.” “Really? I didn’t think anyone did.” “Oh, geez, you’re the
top—anyway, can you just go there for a minute and point it at your
del.icio.us page to generate some recommendations.” “Yeah, uh, OK.”
Jason heard some sounds of typing and sighing thru the phone. “Alright,
here we go: 25 stories. Yeah, this stuff is total crap. Dogs peeing on
people and that sort of thing.”

OK, now Jason was suspicious. Eric was just about the last person on
Earth who ought to be recommended that story. “God, Jason. What do you
train this thing with? It’s *terrible*. What the hell algorithm is it
running anyway?” “That’s what I’m trying to figure out. Mind if I swing
by your place?” “Not really; you might, though.” “See you in fifteen.”

Jason packed up his laptop, ran down the stairs, and biked over to
Eric’s apartment in the Western Addition. Eric answered the door almost
before Jason had knocked. Inside was a den of total filth: clothes
strewn everywhere, pizza boxes piled high, no outside light coming in,
and little inside light turned on. Jason hugged the wall to make sure he
didn’t run into anything. “Take a seat on the couch,” Eric said,
gesturing to a pile of crap in the corner. Jason tried to dig through it
to clear a space big enough for his butt.

“OK, so I’ve got the code on here that generates this stuff. Mind
looking thru it on here with me?” “Yeah, why not?” Eric said, clearing
off a similar space for himself. “Maybe it’s a bug in the renderer; it’s
rendering the same recommendations for everyone.” “Nah, can’t be — the
recommendations are actually in the database. They’re definitely getting
spit out by the recommender.”

“Well, is the recommender just generating the same stuff for everyone?”
“Nah, can’t be. People would have noticed that.” “People are more alike
than you’d expect. Check.” So Jason ran a few queries to see. “Nope,
there’s definitely variance in what people are getting recommended.”

“Hmm,” Eric said. “Well, maybe the recommender you’re using just sucks.”
“No way,” Jason said. “We’re using NNA. It’s state of the art. All the
big guys use it — Google News, Yahoo, even the new NYTimes redesign.”
Eric laughed. “State of the art? That piece of cruft hasn’t been touched
since the Bad Old Days. Isn’t there some new thing everyone is switching
to?” “I don’t know; you obviously follow this stuff more than I do.”

“So why don’t you just upgrade it to the new stuff.” “Yeah, I guess
that’s a good idea. I’ll talk to the guys,” he said. “Oh wait — I just
remembered. We tried that and Wayne Darnis threw this total shitstorm.
You should have seen the place — it was crazy. No way they’re doing that
again.”

“Well, let’s open up NNA and take a look at it,” Eric suggested. “I’m
sure it’s a morass, but I can’t think of anything else to do.” “Fine,”
said Jason, pulling it up. Eric was right. They scrolled through it, but
couldn’t make heads or tails of it. Things had been patched and
repatched so many times that it might as well have been written in
INTERCAL. But Jason scrolled thru it as best he can, trying to see if he
could see something.

“Wait!” Eric shouted. “Go back. What the hell is that?” Eric pointed to
a block of numbers on the screen, sticking out from the rest of the
program like a sore thumb. “I dunno, I assumed it was just some
constants,” Jason said defensively. “Who the hell has a page of one-byte
constants in the middle of their program?”

Eric looked closer. “Oh my god, these aren’t constants. These are
S-boxes!” “Huh?” Jason said. “S-boxes! You never heard about those?”
“No,” Jason said, again annoyed at Eric’s habit of assuming everyone had
his encyclopedic knowledge for odd details. “Back in the bad old days of
encryption, IBM or someone came up with this algorithm called DES — Data
Encryption Standard.

“NIST, the government standards body, ratified it and it went on to be
the standard encryption algorithm used in banks and computers and all
that stuff. But right before the government ratified it, they sent it to
the NSA — you know, the spy organization that hires up all the top math
students to break encryption algorithms so they can better tap
everyone’s phones — for final approval.

“The NSA said they liked it but they just had one little change. And
they fiddled with these things called the S-boxes — big lists of numbers
that your message was run through as it was encrypted. The NSA claimed
they just were helping make sure the S-boxes were as secure as possible,
but they never explained how or why they picked the numbers they did.
So, although it’s never been proven, a lot of people assume the S-boxes
are the NSA’s backdoor into the private conversations of DES users —
that there’s something about the S-boxes that makes it easy for them to
decrypt people’s messages.”

“What are you saying, Eric? That someone put a backdoor into NNA?” “Hey,
I’m not saying anything. I mean, I’m sure there were perfectly good
reasons that DES needed S-boxes; it’s just that the NSA got to choose
them that was suspicious. Maybe the same thing is true with NNA; maybe
there’s some good reason it needs S-boxes, although nothing springs to
mind.”

“But how would a backdoor in this program even work? It doesn’t talk to
the network; it just gets stories in and pushes recommendations out. Am
I supposed to believe that buried within these numbers are some secret
rules to always elevate stories about dogs peeing?”

“No, of course not,” Eric said. “Think about it: it’s the perfect
system. The recommender doesn’t talk to the network itself, of course,
but it gets fed tons of data from crawlers which, all the time, are
scouring the Net for various pages and dumping some facts about them
into the recommender. The recommender could just keep an eye out for
page patterns which match the S-boxes and use those as its
instructions.”

“God, you’re right! That’s brilliant. And it would be almost impossible
to trace, because any one of a million pages on the Web could have set
it off.” “Precisely,” Eric said. “So you’re saying some guy out has a
series of pages that encode secret orders, telling all the world’s news
sites to feature stories about dogs peeing?” “No, no, no, not at all.
That would be irresponsible. I’m just saying it’s possible.” Eric
paused. “Anyway,” he continued, “if he was smart it wouldn’t be a series
of pages — that’s too traceable. He’d just use Tor or some sort of
anonymizing proxy to send the messages by voting through some dummy
account on del.icio.us or something like that. It’d be impossible to
trace.”

“This is all just speculation, of course. We have no more evidence of it
than a bunch of funny numbers in a poorly-written computer program,”
Eric quickly added. “Yes, but it’s so perfect—so devilishly clever. Hey,
hang on a minute. My phone’s ringing.” Jason didn’t realize how
oppressive Eric’s apartment was until he left the heavy putrid air to
answer the phone outside. “Hello?” he said. “Jason, you need to come
home,” said the man on the other end of the line.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Five](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity5)


Bubble City: Chapter 5
======================

November 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity5)

* * * * *

Stare. Stare. Tick. Tick. Ancient art hung on the walls. Ancient books
lined the shelves. The light fixtures looked like they hadn’t been
dusted since Carter urged Americans to save electricity. “So, how are
things at the new offices?” a wisened-looking old man sitting at the
other end of the table asked. “Oh, fine, Grandpa,” Jason replied. “What
is it you guys do again? Videos of models doing backflips?” “No,” Jason
said with a sigh. “We’re a news site.” “You mean like the New York
Times?” “Kind of, except we don’t write the news, we just try to find
bits of it for you.” “How do you do that?” “Well, we look at everything
people on the Internet are reading and talking about and then we try to
pick out which of those people are most like you and tell you about the
stories they like at the moment.” “I see,” the old man said. “I see.”

“So how well does it work?” “Well, uh, not so great, actually. That’s
what I’ve been investigating lately.” “What do you mean?” “Well, it
seems like the site is recommending everyone the same inane stuff, like
stupid videos and that sort of thing.” “Ah, yes. Well, hate to say I
told you so, but this is just like that article i was reading in—what
was it? *Foreign Affairs*?—predicted.” “What do you mean?” “It said that
in the future we’d have this personal newspaper all you tech wizards
have been promising us, only it’d recommend us the same stupid crap
(pardon my language) that average people have been enjoying for
centuries.”

“Really?” Jason asked, suspicious. “Do you happen to have the article?”
“Oh yes, it’s right over—” the old man stood up to get it but then
remembered he had broken his knee, the ostensible reason for Jason’s
visit, and thought better of it. “It’s right over there—could you fetch
it for me?” “Oh, of course,” Jason said. He pulled it down and flipped
through it.

It was by the former editor of the New York Times and made the usual
viritolic case for trusting human editors over some algorithm based on
the whims of random people. And somehow it found a way to compare news
recommenders to street vomit, which Jason had to admit was a
depressingly common sight in San Francisco. Jason briefly wondered if
the old media was using the backdoor to prop up their dying business
models, but quickly decided nobody at those companies was clued-in
enough to know what a backdoor was.

“Yes, yes, I’ve heard all this, Grandfather, but I just don’t buy it.”
“Oh, what’s your explanation? Just need to improve the technology, eh?
Because I’ve heard that one more than a few times.” “No, I think someone
is trying to manipulate the results.” “What? Oh, god, you young people
are always jumping to conspiracy theories. Why can’t you just admit your
precious little system doesn’t work? Why do you have to create some
shadowy cabal of people trying to control the news.” Jason just sighed.
“Let’s talk about something else.”

“What’s your shirt say? Daring Fireball? What’s that?”

* * * * *

Wayne quickly found that, although Google didn’t want their name on the
check or the web site, they were most accommodating in other matters.
They gave him a nice little office inside the Googleplex, let him play
with all the fancy equipment and company perks (free laundry, free
swimming pool, free video games), and had a stream of people coming by
to chat him up and suggest new ideas for promoting NNA.

He was a bit wary of getting so close to someone he had so often railed
against, but he thought that perhaps this was his reward for his
ceaseless railing. Anyway, there were a lot of other evils out there to
fight, and if working with Google made him more effective at fighting
those, wasn’t it, on balance, a good thing? And the free food was nice
too.

* * * * *

On the plane back, Jason tried to figure out the meaning of the S-boxes.
He spent the first couple hours tracing the code, trying to understand
how it worked and how the S-boxes were used, before finally giving up in
frustration. It was just too complicated.

So, being a programmer, he decided to try a more automated approach.
First, he took NNA and replaced its random number generating system with
a function that always returned the number 17 (17 was a pretty random
number, right?). Then he made a copy in which the only thing he changed
was the S-boxes. He then wrote a program to generate random input files
for the recommender. It fed the same file to both recommenders — the
normal one and the one with the modified S-boxes — and it looked at the
output to see if there were any differences. Since he’d taken all the
randomness out of the algorithm, any difference in output had to be due
to the one thing that had changed: the S-boxes. In other words, the
program would search for inputs that triggered the S-boxes.

There was just one problem: there were a lot of possible inputs. For the
rest of the plane ride, his program tried thousands and thousands of
inputs, but none of them showed any difference. When the plane landed,
he slipped his laptop in his bag and let it keep crunching, but he knew
he’d have to try a different tack.

* * * * *

Wayne Darnus told everyone who would listen that he had invented NNA,
but as far as Jason could tell, he was using invented in the most
loosest of senses. Digging back through the changelog on the NNA source
code, which was provided for free to all from a project on SourceForge,
he found the code was originally written by some programmer at Yahoo,
back when Yahoo had real programmers. Getting a name was near impossible
— Yahoo had apparently insisted that all its programmers contribute
under the name “A Yahoo!” Some boneheaded corporate consistency policy,
no doubt.

But the author must have given up his identity *somewhere*. Then it hit
him: mailing lists. No programmer worth their salt could give up a good
mailing list flamewar. Whoever wrote NNA must have shown up on a mailing
list once or twice to defend it. Finding him would be easy: all Jason
had to do was read through ten or twenty thousand messages arguing about
the minutiae of NNA’s design principles.

After trawling through interminable debates in mailing list archives,
for what felt like days, Jason finally found a post from a man who’s
patronizingly knowledgeable tone unmistakably indicated that he was the
one who wrote it all. And the message was posted from home, so his
computer had no qualms about signing his name. There it was in black and
white, the man who had started it all: Dan Miller.

Dan Miller was a rather elusive party. He had no website or home page
and despite NNA’s incredible popularity, he’d apparently never been
interviewed by the press. (Wayne had been interviewed endlessly, of
course. Whenever someone neglected to include him in their history
books, he complained about their lack of commitment to historical
accuracy on his vlogcast.) Jason wasn’t too surprised, though. Finding
MIller hadn’t been easy, and he hadn’t known many journalists who were
willing to do much work to get a technology story.

Miller’s entry in the Yahoo corporate directory had long since gone
stale — he’d left years ago — and emails to his personal account bounced
with the message “Mailbox full.” — overflowing with spam, presumably.

He just couldn’t get a handle on this guy. So he called Eric. “Oh, yeah,
Miller. Wow, there’s a name I hadn’t heard in a long time. So you think
he might be your source into cracking this NNA thing?” “Seems like it’s
worth a shot,” Jason replied. “Yeah, I suppose it does. Alright, then,
well, I guess I’ll look this up for you. What are we searching for? OK,
here we go: Daniel Miller, last known employer Yahoo. Uhhh, OK, he lives
in Mill Valley, I’ll email you his address.” “Wow, Eric, that’s
incredible. Thanks so much.” “No trouble; it’s always nice to have an
excuse to use these skills.”

Marin County wasn’t exactly known for its comprehensive public transport
system, so Jason hopped a cab, which deposited him someplace random in
the middle of a hillside. He climbed around for a while looking for the
house he knew must be nestled in it somewhere, before finally locating
the place. He navigated his way to the entrance, then knocked politely
on the door.

He wondered how a software developer could live in a place like this —
isolated from the rest of the Valley, away from the buzz and excitement
of the industry. But then again, he wondered how a software developer
could live without having a website. Maybe Miller wasn’t much of a
software developer.

A man in a beard who looked to be about in his late fifties answered the
door. “Hello?” he said, apparently unaccustomed to receiving visitors.
“Dan Miller?” “Yup. “Hey there, I was looking into NNA’s source code and
I have a few questions. I know you probably hate to be bugged about
software you wrote over a decade ago, but I came all the way out here
and I’d really appreciate just a bit of your time to answer just a
question or two about NNA.”

Miller smiled knowingly and gave Jason a long, piercing gaze. “ah, yes,”
he said at last. “I’ve been expecting you.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Six](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity6)


GPhone Announced, Morons
========================

November 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/introgphone)

* * * * *

Several years ago, the key members of the team at Danger, then the
leading phone OS development firm (they made the Hiptop, called the
Sidekick in the US), left to start a new company called Android, which
was shortly thereafter acquired by Google. The folks at Android were not
shy at what they were up to. One founder, who was in Boston at the same
time I was, stated it clearly: they were creating an open OS for phones.
When asked what the point of this was, he suddenly got very vague.

A couple years later Apple released the iPhone and what was now a Google
division started rounding up partners for the Android OS. The press got
wind of it and went crazy. Google was making a phone — a GPhone! How
could Apple compete? What fancy gadgets did it have? Would Google take
control of the cell phone industry too?

And today, Google announced what they were doing: the same thing they
were always doing, the same thing Android had been doing since day one.
They’re making an open OS for phones.

The only announcement today is of their new “Open Handset Alliance”,
which I can’t help but feel is a jab at the Open Content Alliance (which
Google pointedly refuses to join). Google has certainly put their clout
behind the team at Android and gotten an impressive number of people to
sign up to support their little OS. But let’s not let the press buzz get
out of hand. Google isn’t coming out with a phone, they’re releasing an
open phone operating system. When asked what the point of this is, they
suddenly get very vague. Just like always.

I certainly can’t imagine that having an open phone OS is a bad thing
and I’m glad such talented people are working on it and I hope it’s good
and gets widely adopted, so I can get an even nicer Sidekick cheaply.
But, jeez people, let’s not blow this out of proportion. It’s just a
bunch of open source software.


Bubble City: Chapter 6
======================

November 8, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity6)

* * * * *

Miller ushered him into a clean, but ancient, little house with leather
sofas and bright windows. “Take a seat,” he said. “Can I get you
anything?” “Uh, no thanks,” Jason said, a bit surprised at this
reception. “OK, I’m gonna fix myself a drink,” Miller said, heading into
the kitchen.

“You know,” he said in between noises of liquids mixing and ice
crunching, “I always knew someday someone would call me to account. I’m
actually kind of surprised it took so long.” He returned and grabbed a
chair across from Jason. “Alright, so let’s do this: I think you have
something you want to ask me.”

Caught a bit off-guard by all the frankness—and the prescience—Jason
began by stuttering. “Well, uh, I was looking through the NNA code and,
as I’m sure you know, well, I mean obviously you know, there’s this
section in there that’s just a series of numbers. S-boxes, you might
call them.” Miller laughed. “Anyway, it appears to me that the S-boxes
only affect the results under fairly unusual circumstances — that they
seem to be a kind of backdoor allowing someone to remotely control the
output of NNA.”

“So you haven’t found the key yet?” “No, not yet. That code is
impenetrable!” Miller laughed. “I was hoping you might be able to shed
some light.” “Come on, now. I’m sure you’re nice, but I’m not about to
give out the backdoor to NNA to any pretty young thing that happens to
come out here and knock on my door. Anyway, even if I wanted to, I
couldn’t. Yahoo insisted on wiping all my drives after I left the
company. I don’t have the key anymore.”

“But surely you can reconstruct it? I mean, the code is open source —
you can see the backdoor right there.” “Yes, but it was a sort of public
key-style system. What’s in the code is just the public part; anyone can
read that. But it was generated from the private key — the series of
patterns that will trigger it. Basically, what you see in those S-boxes
is just the hash of the private key and it only kicks in if the hash of
a voting cluster matches.”

“So why’d you do it? For fun?” “Of course not. I knew it was wrong. I
wasn’t gonna pull another Dennis Ritchie. I was ordered to. The folks at
Yahoo insisted that if we were going to open source this engine they had
to have a way of clearing out illegal and offensive stories; otherwise
it’d tarnish their good name. Of course, that department disappeared in
a reorg shortly after the software’s release and I disappeared along
with it, so I suppose it’s all kind of irrelevant now, except as a
historical curiosity.”

“Historical curiosity?” Jason shouted, before realizing how loud he was
being. “It’s a major security vulnerability in a key piece of
infrastructure! Do you have any idea how bad this is?” “Yeah, yeah, I
suppose technically it is,” Miller said, “but let’s be realistic here.
My copy of the key was wiped, everyone at Yahoo who knew about the
project is long gone, and there weren’t many of them to begin with. It’s
a dead letter.”

“You don’t understand,” Jason said. “Someone’s using it. I don’t know
whether they were at Yahoo or whether they got it from someone or
whether they figured it out, but it’s getting used. There are anomalies
in the recommendations that just can’t be explained any other way.” “Oh
god. What are they doing with it?” “Well, it’s difficult to tell without
cracking the key. The big piece I’ve been able to spot so far is that
they’re getting inane videos recommended to everyone. But who knows what
else they’re doing.”

“Well, you do. Just change the S-boxes and see what recommendations
change.” “Ah, you’re right! I just need to feed it the live input! If I
give that to two versions with no randomness and different S-boxes, the
difference will have to be exactly the orders from the backdoor. And oh
god, and that’ll tell me what the key is: I just remove all the pieces
of the input that don’t affect the difference and whatever’s left must
be what triggers the backdoor. That’s brilliant! I just need to get my
hands on a copy of the live database and some computers. Wow, thanks so
much.” “Glad to help.”

“So you’ll come forward? Tell the world about the security hole you put
in so we can force people to take it out?” Miller laughed. “Not a
chance.” “But I thought you said — you said you were against it.” “I am,
but look around. See this house? This couch? This cozy little place in
the woods. I got to retire early on my Yahoo stock options. And I got
those by signing some pretty iron-clad non-disclosure agreements. I talk
about any of this in public and I spend the rest of my life in court,
watching all of this get taken away. Sorry, kid, but you’re on your own
on this one.”

“But, but,” Jason said. “Don’t you see how important this is? The
integrity of the world’s news is at stake!” “And you seem like just the
one to save it,” Miller said. “In fact, it seems like you already have
your solution all figured out. All I can really say is best of luck to
you.”

“But, but,” Jason said, exasperated. “Well, the very least you can do is
walk me through the code.” Miller just laughed. “That code’s gotten so
crusty since the last time I touched it. I don’t think there’s a person
on Earth who really understands it anymore. I guess that’s why no one
else has caught the S-boxes. Everyone knows better than to go near that
thing.”

“Anyway, unless you have anything else, I’ve got a game of Starcraft
that I really should be getting back to,” Miller said. “Uh, I guess not.
Thanks for talking to me about it, I guess.” “Oh, of course. Sorry I
couldn’t be more help. But good luck, kid. You’ll need it.” And with
that Miller showed him the door. And Jason found himself standing alone
in the middle of a hillside, wondering how a kid like him was going to
save the news.

* * * * *

When he got back, he quietly made a dump of the Newsflip database and
rejiggered his program to try to dissect the live DB instead of
generating random ones. He quickly saw much better results. Within hours
it had pared things down to just a couple hundred thousand
possibilities.

While he was waiting, he pored over the diffs he’d generated as Miller
had suggested: the changes that the backdoor had made to people’s
recommendations. The first thing he noticed was that just about everyone
was seeing crummy stories: the video of the dog peeing, news about dumb
celebrities, that sort of thing. Meanwhile, real news — like the attack
on Iran — was completely buried. Only a small handful ever saw it.

Jason was shocked. The American people weren’t being dumb — obsessed
with celebrity over politics, with bodily fluids over intellectualism.
That’s just what they were being fed. And there was someone out there
making sure of that.

Jason was bubbling mad — and his anger only increased as he watched the
elements tick away on his little script to search for the backdoor —
each tick making his blood boil higher. And as it was almost done, the
phone rang. It was Sarah.

“Hey kiddo,” she sang. “Caught you playin’ hooky at the office? What’s
up?” she asked. “Oh, not much,” Jason lied. “Just thought I’d work from
home today.” “Oh yeah, I get sick of those slobs too. Hey, want to come
over to my place and keep me company?” “Uh, well,” Jason started. “Oh,
don’t worry. I’ve got wifi and everything — you can work from here just
fine. I promise I won’t distract you… too much.”

Jason knew he should stay at home and finish what he’d started, but a
tingle of excitement ran through his body, telling him he really ought
to see Sarah. “OK, how about I come over there in twenty minutes?”
“Sounds good,” she said, and gave him her address. “See you soon!” “See
you,” he said, and hung up.

By then the computer had cracked the code and he went over to see what
was what. It was, as predicted, a bunch of bookmarks, but in some weird
series that Jason couldn’t quite follow. He tried reproducing it by
creating some dummy accounts of his own, but before he could really
puzzle things out he realized that he’d promised Sarah he’d be there ten
minutes ago and dropped what he was working on to run for the door.

* * * * *

Deep inside the Googleplex, behind a set of keycard-locked doors, behind
another set that required keys for entry, behind another set that
clearly read “NO VISITORS BEYOND THIS POINT”, lay a series of employees
that, except for the slightly-heightened security, seemed like all the
others.

Tom was going through his daily rounds of checking on the recommender
results when he noticed a certain story was being recommended to him
twice. The recommender was programmed to only recommend the same story
to someone only once, so that never happened — unless one of his
teammates screwed up. “Hey Kevin, get over here. You fucked up again.” A
miffed-looking British fellow headed over to Tom’s desk. “What are you
talking about?”

“You fucked up — I’m seeing this dog story getting recommended twice.”
“But how can that be?” Kevin asked. “I put in safeguards to make sure
that never happened again. Unreal. Are you sure it’s not on your end?”
“Of course it’s not on my end — I’m looking at the raw recommendation
output.” “Alright, alright, well trace it back. See which posts are
conflicting.” “OK, give me a second. Here, grab a chair.”

“Whoa, this is weird,” Tom said. “I don’t recognize any of these
accounts. Do you?” “Numbered account names? We’d never be so blatant.
Fuck. You know what this means, right?” “We have an incompetent intern?”
“No, moron, it means someone’s onto us. They’ve figured out the back
door and they’re testing it for themselves.” “Oh shit. Shit, shit, shit.
What do we do?” “What can we do? We gotta talk to Saul.”

They headed over to a slightly larger cubicle hidden in a corner. “Saul,
we’ve got a situation here.” “Situation?” Saul asked. “What is this?
Some kind of spy movie? What’re you talking about?” “Someone else has
found the backdoor. We spotted a bunch of bookmarks in the same pattern
as we’re using from a different set of accounts.” “Fuck. OK, well,
thanks for telling me.

“Here’s what I want you to do. You’re going to walk calmly back to your
desks. You’re going to write up everything you’ve learned so far and
place it on this Flash drive.” He removed a small USB keyfob from inside
his desk. You’re then going to give me the keyfob, wipe everything
related from your machines, and pretend this never ever happened, you
understand? This is out of your hands now. I’m going to make sure this
gets… taken care of.” Tom and Kevin’s eyes widened. “Wait,” Tom said,
“you don’t mean…” “Exactly,” Saul replied. “This is a job for… public
relations.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Seven](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity7)


Cooling the Mark Out
====================

November 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/markcooling)

* * * * *

You run into a man at a party. You strike up a conversation. He seems
very friendly. You like him. And then he tells you about some friends he
has. This man is called the roper.

The friends tell you about a deal. They know about a gamble, but it’s
rigged so you can’t lose. Just give them some money and they’ll show
you. This is called the con.

The first time you give them money it works; it comes back ten-fold. But
now you’re getting greedy. You want to do it again, bigger this time.
Only this time their money doesn’t come back. This is called the loss.

You feel like a chump. Your greediness got the best of you. You want to
get back at those con-men. You are called the mark.

But the roper talks you down. You can’t go to the police without
admitting that you were trying to commit a crime. And everybody has to
lose sometime, right? It could be worse. This is called cooling out the
mark.

Erving Goffman, the great sociologist, [noticed this decades
ago](http://www.tau.ac.il/~algazi/mat/Goffman--Cooling.htm). Only he
didn’t just notice it in con men. Students had to be persuaded to accept
a world far less idealistic than they learned in school. Kids who failed
the bar exam had to persuade themselves they didn’t really want to be
lawyers. People at restaurants had to be persuaded to accept the screwup
by the kitchen. Everyone occasionally needs “schooling in the philosophy
of taking a loss.”

It was this last example that particularly struck me. The other day, I
was watching [a video clip of a motivational
speaker](http://www.customersarealways.com/2007/03/lessons_from_james_arthur_ray.html).
And what did he talk about? A screwup by a restaurant he went to. And
how the host worked hard, overhard even, to pacify him about it.

It was a decent story. It was very well told. But why was a motivational
speaker telling it? But now I realize: it was about cooling out the
mark.

Cooling out marks is how institutions persuade people to accept things
they think are wrong. The con-man convinces you getting stolen from is
OK. Your job convinces you it’s OK that they’re corrupt. The restaurant
persuades you it’s OK that they’re incompetent.

Motivational speakers do the same thing. Did the economy cheat you, fire
you, stick you in some crappy job with a crabby boss? Listen, the
motivational speaker explains, it’s not the economy’s fault. And just as
the roper is always separate from the con men, the motivational speaker
doesn’t directly work for the economy. He sits on the sidelines, waiting
to cool the mark out.

-   Further reading: Barbara Ehrenreich, *[Bait and
    Switch](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805081240)*



Bubble City: Chapter 7
======================

November 15, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity7)

* * * * *

On his way into the office, Trent saw a pretty young girl and decided to
use it as an opportunity to improve his marketing skills. “Hello there,”
he shouted at a small and slender woman wearing a huge black coat. She
didn’t say anything so he ran to catch up with her. “Hello there,” he
shouted again, this time louder and closer to his face. “Umm, hello,”
she mumbled and tried to hurry past. “What’s your name?” he shouted.
“Mm, Jessica,” she mumbled. “Hello there, Jessica,” he shouted. “My
name’s Trent and I have a very exciting service I want to tell you
about. I think it will revolutionize the way you look at the news
industry today. It’s called Newsflip and—” They had come to the end of
the block and Jessica had decided to dart across the street, dodging
traffic. Trent decided not to follow. “Crazy bitch,” he muttered.

But shortly after he got into the office and settled into his desk, he
got to watch another stunningly attractive young thing, wearing a tight
blouse and tighter jeans saunter over to his desk. “Trent,” she said,
sounding just happy enough that you couldn’t honestly describe her as
sounding unhappy, “you’ve got a call from the press on line 3.” “Thanks
Sandy,” he said and watched her ass swing as she sauntered away from his
desk. He picked up the phone. “Newsflip, Trent speaking.”

“Hellllo, there,” said an effusive voice at the other end of the line.
“I’m calling from Digital World News Online Monthly and we’re writing a
feature segment about today’s top users of NNA. Now, obviously, I want
to give Newsflip top billing, so I was hoping you had some time to
answer a few questions about your site for us good folks.” “Why, of
course,” Trent said chivalrously. “Anything for the press!”

“Well, my first question is how strong is your commitment to NNA?” “Oh,
total, total. I know there have been some nasty and false rumors
swirling around, but I can assure you those are untrue. We are 100%
committed to standing on the strength of the NNA platform, which we’re
committed to as well. Kind of like a man who’s chained to the platform
that he’s chained to, if you know what I mean?” “Ohhh, I doooo,” cooed
the reporter in a voice that was less than convincing.

“And do you have any problems or complaints with it? Have you been doing
any research into improving it?” “Well, honestly, it’s such a great
platform that we have our hands full just using it as it is, frankly.”
“So you have no one working on the internals?” “No, but it’s not really
necessary as it’s such a strong foundation for our platform.”

“I see. Well, thank you so much for your time, Mr. …” “Oh, Trent, just
call me Trent.” “Well, thank you so much for your time, Trent. This has
been very valuable for the article.” “Well, thank you.” “Bye!” “Bye.”
“Bye.” “Bye.” “Bye.” “Um, bye.” A long pause. “Bye….” “Bye.” “Bye.”
“Bye.” “Bye!” Trent hung up.

Nice journalist, Trent thought. He should note that down. What was her
name? Hmm, he didn’t think she said.

“Sandy!” he yelled out over the office. The girl in the tight blouse
scurried over to his desk. “Yes, sir?” “I’m gonna take a meditation
break for about fifteen minutes.” “Yes, sir; I’ll do the usual.”
“Thanks, Sandy.” He again watched her saunter back to her desk. The ran
to the small closet he’d reclaimed as his meditation chamber and locked
the door behind him.

* * * * *

It was Thursday, so Sarah decided to knock off work a bit early to go to
her street fighting class. They met in the unfinished basement of what
Sarah recognized as the old Pets.com building, but Sarah doubted few of
the other participants would recognize it as such. Instead, they knew it
mostly as the place where they got their noses ground into the cement
and left blood stains on the wall, before stepping back and thanking
their instructor politely for the demonstration.

“Who wants to go first today?” Owen, their instructor, asked. A girl in
a pink jumpsuit raised her hand. Owen loved picking on the newbies. “Now
this move is called the jackdrill,” he said, picking the jumpsuited girl
up by her waist, flipping her upside-down, and grinding her head into
the mat on the floor by spinning her around. After a couple seconds he
righted and returned her, his voice changing to sincerely apologetic.
“Are you alright? Was that OK?” he said, looking her over. “Here, here,
let me fix your hair.” “Oh, no, no, thank you,” the girl said, a bit
stunned, “it’s fine.”

When it was time to practice on their own, Sarah got paired up with an
outrageously cute and muscular man she’d been eying the whole evening.
“Hey there,” she said, extending her arm. “I’m Sarah.” “Jonathan,” he
said, smiling winningly. She felt her heart melt just a little bit.
Flipping Jonathan by the waist and watching the muscles on his back
ripple, she became determined to ask him out at the end of the lesson.

She didn’t need to. As he was toweling the sweat off his chest, he
approached her. “So Sarah, you doing anything tonight?” She thought for
a second. Jason wanted to talk about some weird work thing he’d noticed
but she could blow that off for a night. “Uh, nope,” she answered. “Why
don’t I take you out to dinner?” he asked. “Sure, that’d be great,” she
said, smiling.

At dinner, she discovered that Jonathan shared her interests. In fact,
he also appeared to share her friends’ interests as well as various
other random interests she could think of. On just about any subject he
could marshall a stream of facts, with names and dates and places,
capped off by a touching personal anecdote or a joke.

Erlang: “Isn’t Erlang fantastic? I just love the way that
message-passing unifies both the internal control structure and the
intra-process communication. That said, the syntax could use some work…
I remember one time I showed this Erlang program to a friend and they
thought it was Perl!”

Guitar: “Oh, I just think the guitar is a beautiful instrument. I love
the way you get lost in the sound when you’re playing a Robert Plant
solo. I remember one time when I got lost in the sound and didn’t find
my way out for weeks!”

Slovenian philosophy: “I just can’t get enough of Žižek! I mean, I know
a lot of people think using a Lacanian model to question notions of
false consciousness runs afoul of modern Popperian scientific
sensibility, but at the very least now that the Bayesians have taken up
arms against the Popperites they’ll be willing to admit there’s at least
some analytical heft to the Lacanian techniques. God, you’re great. I
remember this one time when I told a friend that and they just looked at
me.”

Sarah accidentally dropped her napkin on the floor and Jonathan ran over
to pick it up for her and she watched his muscles ripple beneath his
clothes and fantasized about tearing them off. “Hey, my place is just
down the street a little. Want to come back for a bit?” So they walked,
chatting happily, through the Mission and she let him into her apartment
and they chatted some more on the couch for a bit, finding odd excuses
to move a bit closer to each other and look into each others’ eyes until
Sarah reached out for the kiss and Jonathan followed and pushed her down
onto the couch, making out for a while before he began lifting off her
shirt.

* * * * *

Wayne spent the first load of cash on a fancy new office, the best to
give the right impression about the Wayne Darnus Center for User
Priorities, of course. Then he hired an attractive assistant for the
same reason (and to help him with his soon-to-be-busy schedule).

“What’s the first order of business?” he asked her, once he was settled
in his plush new chair behind is imposing new desk. “Uh, we don’t have
any orders of business,” she said. “OK, well then the first order of
business is to think of one.”

“What’s the first order of business?” he asked her. “To think of a first
order of business,” she said. “Alright, I’ll do that and get back to
you.”

“Although technically,” he added, “it will be a second order of business
since thinking of it already was the first order of business.” “Good
point,” she said, and scurried off.

* * * * *

Jason spent the day thinking about the other afternoon he spent with
Sarah. He’d come over to work but working led to chatting and chatting
led to moving closer and pretty soon the only productive thing he got
out of the day was exercise. As soon as he was done with what he was
working on that day, he biked as fast as he could to Sarah’s house and
knocked on the door. “Hey there,” he said smiling as she opened it. She
didn’t smile back; she just grabbed him and threw him against the wall,
closing the door behind her with her foot. She grabbed his head and
pushed it into the wall with her mouth, as he made pleasant-sounding
noises. By the time they got into the bathroom, he was only
half-clothed.

Then there was a knock on the door and they pulled away. “Who the fuck
is that?” Jason asked. Sarah looked at the clock on her dresser. “Oh,
shoot, I’m sorry. That’s probably Jonathan.” Jason looked at her for a
while, puzzled. She looked back for what seemed like a long moment and
then said “Oh, you do know I’m poly, right?”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Eight](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity8)


Bubble City: Chapter 8
======================

November 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity8)

* * * * *

“Poly?” “Yeah, poly,” she said, hunting for her shirt and putting it
back on. No sense in being *that* forward when she answered the door.
“You mean like polygamous?” “No, silly, do I look like I have multiple
wives? I just have that one…” “You ha—wait, so what does poly mean?”
“Polyamorous,” she said, putting her socks back on. Jason saw her
heading to the door and realized he better put on some more clothes of
his own. Because putting on some more clothes of Sarah’s seemed wrong
for the mood. “Multiple loves.” Jason scurried towards his pants. “I
don’t instantly assume that just because I’m seeing one person that
means I can’t see another.” Jason tried to pull the pants up while
avoiding any unsightly bulges. “I just don’t sign on to that arbitrary
rule of our culture.”

“But it’s not arbitrary!” Jason insisted. “What about jealousy?” Sarah
opened the door as Jason was struggling to put on his shirt. Jonathan
was standing there and she grabbed his head, gave him a long
faux-passionate kiss, and then closed the door again in his face. “Did
that make you jealous, sweety?” she asked Jason, a tad mockingly he
thought. “Oh, I’m sorry, honey,” she said, making out with him and
sliding a hand down his pants. “Ohhh,” he said. “Well now I’m suddenly
*very* jealous,” he said smiling. She pinched him and ground him against
the wall a bit before going to get the door. “Well, when you get over
it, you know where to find me,” she said, pulling Jonathan inside. “Uh,
who’s that?” Jonathan asked, pointing to Jason. “Oh, he was just going,”
she said, before dragging Jonathan into the bedroom.

* * * * *

Jason tried to get back to work, to figure out the secret code that
allowed one to take over the NNA algorithm, but he just couldn’t focus.
Every time he tried to sit down to do the math, he felt tired or bored
or distracted. All he could think about was Sarah. And all he could
think about that was how anathema to productivity it was.

But there wasn’t much he could do. He couldn’t get Sarah out of his
mind. And even if he could, there she was, just across the office,
smiling as if nothing was wrong, and forcing her way back into his
consciousness. So the next night he went back there. Sarah started
first.

“Oh, Jason, I’m so sorry. I was incredibly rude. I just got so swept up
in the moment, you know?” “Oh, that’s OK. I’m sorry I wasn’t more
understanding of your, um, lifestyle.” “But now?” “I think I can accept
it.” “Oh, Jason,” she said, hugging him, “I’m so glad. I really do like
you.” “And Jon?” “Well, I guess I like him too. Are you OK with that?”
“Yeah, I think so.” “Anything I can do to make it worth your while?” she
asked before kissing him, starting with his lips and then working her
way down his chest.

* * * * *

Jason had heard people say that getting laid made them more productive,
but he always found it a colossal waste of time. Not only the time
wasted with your partner, but also all the time you spent during the day
thinking about the time you’d wasted or the time you would waste in the
future. It made it hard to focus, worst of all now, when something
important was at stake.

He put all thoughts of Sarah out of—Sarah and Jonathan, sitting there,
his muscl—anyway, he put all of that out of his mind and focused on the
problem at hand. How did this sequence of bookmarks lead to that
particular recommendation?

After much procrastination, he cracked the code. There were a series of
accounts, call them dummy0 thru dummy15, and a series of pages, call
them page0 thru page15. dummy0 linked to page0, dummy1 linked to page0
and page1, dummy2 linked to page0, page1, and page2, and so on. Then
dummy15 also linked to an additional page and that was the one that got
pushed out in all the recommendations.

Jason figured that the clustering algorithm must have discovered this
cluster, noticed the odd behavior, and taken it aside for special
processing. Not that anyone could know for sure without untangling all
that code.

* * * * *

Days before, Jason Blakeslee, Google’s head of public relations, and
received a visit from Samuel Turnbill, Google’s head of evangelism. The
meeting was coordinated over Google Email, it was marked in Google
Calendars, it was recorded by Google Video, and held on the Google
campus. In that, it was like many other meetings. And yet, somehow, it
was very different.

“I’m sure you’ll recall NNA,” Samuel began, getting down to business.
“Of course,” Blakeslee said. “Well, it appears someone found a piece of
it that we were hoping to keep hidden.” “Jesus, Sam, would it kill you
to speak clearly? I’m head of public relations, not the public.” “OK,
OK. So here’s how it is: there’s a special control system in NNA that
allows us to exercise some influence over the workings of the algorithm,
for administrative purposes and that sort of thing. Someone else appears
to have discovered the control structure. If this gets out, it could be
incredibly damaging. It *must* be stopped.” “I understand,” Blakeslee
explained. “I’ll put our team on it.” “Thank you,” Samuel said handing
Blakeslee a USB thumb drive. “Here’s a quick explanation and all the
relevant logs.”

And thus the head of evangelism handed the drive to the head of public
relations who handed it to head of sensitive operations who handed it to
his tech lead who handed it to Mike. “Piece of cake,” Mike said.

The logs showed the IP address and time the perp had contacted Google’s
servers with his bookmark request. The IP address was a cable modem used
mainly by one man: a Mr. Jason Barsto. Barsto had a Google account,
which allowed Mike to pull up a pretty decent summary of his entire
life: his email, his calendar, his search history, what news stories he
liked, where he lived, surveillance photos of his house, the top people
he chatted with, and on and on.

Now came the fun part: compiling a dossier. Mike skimmed through
Barsto’s life, with the aid of Google technology that helped highlight
key concepts and messages, getting inside Barsto’s head and trying to
understand who he was.

He started with search. Barsto was a geek, the kind of person who
searched Google every time a thought passed through his head. Within
minutes, he knew everything from what kind of error messages Barsto’s
computer was showing that day to what kind of porn he enjoyed. it was
like a raw feed into his stream-of-consciousness.

Just in the past few hours Barsto had searched for:

    big daddy  
    galaxy halos  
    guitar hero four  
    san francisco library  
    arguments against evolution
    stomach cancer  
    site:mayoclinic.org stomach cancer

Next came email. Using Google technology developed for targetting ads
and improving search, his system pulled out the key concepts and emails
in Barsto’s mailbox. Pretty quickly he learned who Barsto’s friends are,
who his crushes were, who his boss was, and what he did with his free
time. Using his Google Chat logs, he found what Barsto liked to gossip
about and what crazy links he shared with his friends. (Luckily for
Mike, Barsto appeared to be the kind of startup geek who never saw a
Google app he didn’t use.)

Using the calendar, he discovered when Barsto went to the gym, when he
went to see his girlfriend, and so on. Connecting this with the Google
friend-tracking app Barsto had installed on his GPS-enabled phone,
Barsto was able to get solid GPS coordinates for all of these places on
a Google Map as well as see where Barsto was right now. They could
probably ask his phone to record all of his phone calls for them,
although Barsto didn’t have that kind of clearance.

Since Barsto used Google News and YouTube, he got a fairly good sense of
what kinds of things Barsto was interested in and, thanks to Google
Checkout, he was able to see all the recent purchases Barsto had made.
But — and here was the motherload — Barsto ran Google Desktop Search,
which allowed Mike to access any file on Barsto’s computer. He quickly
pulled up Barsto’s full browsing history and got to see what kind of
porn he liked, what blogs he visited, what he was reading about today,
which non-Google apps he used, etc. (For people who didn’t have Google
Desktop Search installed, he got the same data thru Google Web
Accelerator.)

By the end of the day he felt he knew Barsto better than he knew some of
his own best friends. He put the highlights of what he’d learned into a
report for his superiors: Barsto’s name and address, his occupation and
skill-level, his interests and hobbies, his friends and girlfriends, and
(his favorite part) a series of embarrassing or otherwise fun facts that
could be used for blackmail or simply amusement. (You wouldn’t believe
how many people kept naked photos of themselves or loved ones on their
hard drives!)

He sent the report to his superior and wandered off for a bit to dwell
on the power he had as a faceless person deep inside an office park in
Mountain View to know every detail of another person’s life; a person
living just miles north in San Francisco. He wondered what it would be
like if he came across him on the street — here, he would know every
detail of Barsto’s life, from the secrets he confided over IM with his
friends to what he looked like naked, while Barsto would see Mike as
just another random face in the crowd.

Mike loved his job.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Nine](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity9)


Bubble City: Chapter 10
=======================

November 19, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity10)

* * * * *

Wayne met Samuel, his Google contact, at a San Francisco bar. They were
already several drinks in when the conversation turned to
business.”Well, I’ve got the Center all up and running,” he said.
“That’s great to hear. Congratulations. That’s just fantastic.” “There’s
just one problem.” “Oh?” “I don’t know what to do with it.” “Oh, don’t
worry. You can do whatever you want. I mean, we’ll have some requests
from time to time but it’s your project — feel free to do whatever you
want to do.”

“But that’s just what I mean,” Wayne said. “I don’t know what I want to
do.” “Come on, surely there must be something?” “Not really. What are
you working on these days?” “Oh, all sorts of things. You know, it’s
pretty crazy as usual. You’re on the Google NDA right?” “Yeah, and the
corporate email system and contracts and everything.” “OK, so then I can
tell you a bit. You know how the job is: tracking down people to co-opt
or destroy.” “Must be exciting.”

“Not usually. Although one exciting thing happened lately. We’re doing a
manhunt on this NNA stuff.” “A what?” “Apparently some kid found out
something he wasn’t supposed to and we’re tracking him down.” “Huh?
Tracking him down?” “Well, he booked when he found out we were on his
tail, so we get to use all our databases to try and figure out where he
fled to and how to get him back. He’s a smart kid — MIT grad, hacker,
etc. — so it’s actually a really fun puzzle. The guys back at HQ are
loving it. It’s like their college puzzle hunts all over again.”

“So what do you do when you find him?” Wayne asked. “The usual,” Samuel
said as if it was obvious. “Co-opt or destroy.” “But how do you destroy
a kid?” “Oh, that’s actually quite fun, although obviously not ideal for
the bottom line. Basically we take him out and then falsify a whole
bunch of evidence to make it look like an accident. You wouldn’t believe
the quality of the data forgers we have on staff — best guys in the
business.”

“Wait? Take him out — you mean you’ll kill him?” “Not usually; bodies
are messy to clean up that way. Usually we just expose them to chemicals
or shocks or some other brain-rotting substance. They live, but not with
an IQ that will be of any worry for us.” “Wow, geez,” Wayne said, a bit
taken aback. “I had no idea Google did stuff like that.” “Oh, come on,
Wayne, don’t be naive. You of all people should know better than that.”
“Oh, I’m not be—” “It’s just the price of doing business,” Samuel
continued. “Every company has its little hidden costs. Factories dump
harmful chemicals wherever seems convenient. Pharmaceutical companies
cover up their products’ harms. Conglomerates bribe foreign governments.
Clothing companies engage in human trafficking. Scratch any serious
company and you’ll find some dark little secret. That’s what makes the
money go ‘round.”

“Yes, but well, taking people out. Isn’t that a bit extreme?” “Oh, so
when [Shell takes out labor
activists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Saro-Wiwa), that’s OK. And
when [GAP condemns young women to a life of involuntary
servitude](http://www.coopamerica.org/programs/rs/profile.cfm?id=229),
that’s OK. And when [GE dumbs tons of PCBs into the Hudson
River](http://www.cleanupge.org/), that’s just fine. But Google messes
with one or two people and it’s suddenly the end of the world? How is
that fair?”

“Look, Wayne, Google’s [one of the ten biggest US
companies](http://bigpicture.typepad.com/comments/2007/11/google-5-us-mar.html).
If you think we’re going to keep acting like some little software shop
in Mountain View, you’re crazy.” “I know, I know, but I thought Google
was supposed to be different. What happened to Don’t Be Evil?” Samuel
laughed. “Don’t Be Evil was some hacker’s PR ploy that got out of hand.
Paul Buchheit, the guy who made Gmail, suggested it in an early meeting
and Amit Patel, another early Googler starting writing it on whiteboards
everywhere. A journalist saw it and the rest was history — but don’t be
mistaken, it was never official corporate policy.”

“But come on, Samuel, just between us, don’t you ever feel a little bit
guilty about all this?” “Look Wayne, what good would it do? If I raise
complaints about it to my superior they’ll mark me as unstable and
demote me. If I threaten to go public they’ve got an ironclad NDA —
they’ll take away my house and family with their crack team of lawyers
and I’ll spend the rest of my life at a minimum wage job. And if even
that doesn’t scare me, then they’ll turn the black ops on me too. When
they’re through with me, I’ll be such a gibbering paranoid idiot that
nobody will take anything I say seriously. So it’s stupid to even think
about this stuff.”

“But what about your superior? Why not convince him?” “Come on, Wayne,
you can’t even convince me this is the wrong thing; you think I’m going
to be able to convince a guy who does this sort of thing his entire
life? And even if I do, then what? He gets fired and ruined right along
with me. Why bring another person in on this mess? What good does that
do?”

Wayne took a long sigh. “But surely, at some fundamental level, you’ve
got to realize this is wrong? Has Google entirely taken away your
humanity?” “Oh come on, Wayne, that’s not humanity, that’s naievete.
Sure, when they’re a kid everyone thinks they’ll fight for truth and
justice and the American way of not torturing people. But you also want
to succeed. And success requires compromise; there’s no other way. If
you don’t compromise then they just filter you out. You’re labeled
‘difficult’ or ‘uncooperative’ or ‘insubordinate’. Believe me; I’ve seen
it dozens of times. I’ve even done it myself when it had to be done. By
the time you get to a position like mine, you begin to realize that this
is just the way the world works. And what are you supposed to do about
that, huh, Wayne?”

“Look Wayne, I’m telling you all this because I know you’re a smart guy.
Your heart’s in the right place, but so is your head. Google’s counting
on you to be a big success and you can’t do stuff like that if you have
to worry about every little kid that needs to be quashed. So here, I’ll
pick up the tab. Why don’t you go home and get yourself some rest? And
then tomorrow I’ll give you a call and we’ll pick out some fun projects
for you to work on? Doesn’t that sound good?”

“Yeah,” Wayne said at last. “I guess so. God, I don’t know what’s gotten
into me. I used to be such a hard-head.” “I know, Wayne, I know. That’s
what I like about you. You did whatever it took to get ahead. Look,
everyone goes thru this the first time they have to cross a line. I
certainly had my fair share of sleepless nights. But you come out of it
smarter and stronger. I promise you, you wake up tomorrow morning,
you’ll be a better man — ready to conquer anything. Now go and get some
rest.” “OK, Samuel. And thanks for the drinks.” “Don’t thank me,” Samuel
said. “Thank Google.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Eleven](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity11)


Bubble City: Chapter 9
======================

November 19, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity9)

* * * * *

Derren, head of sensitive public relations operations for Google, had to
figure out what to do about Jason. Normally Google prided itself on
being very “flat” — few people were in charge, most people worked in
teams. But the bosses had decided that public relations had to be
special, which meant that all these tough choices fell on Derren’s
shoulders alone.

But Derren knew better than that. He’d previously had a similar position
at Yahoo, where the Chinese government made him give up the names of
bloggers to their secret police. The guilt wouldn’t go away for weeks.
Derren was sick of that kind of stress.

Google was a company of hackers, so when he moved there he got there he
had the programmers whip up a technical solution to his social problem.
Now when he faced a tough decision like this, he punched the key facts
into the computer and had his team vote on the solution. That way it
wasn’t his decision — it was simply the “wisdom of crowds,” the
aggregated knowledge of Google’s crack team of spooks.

Describing Jason’s case would be simple:

> Fresh MIT grad discovers backdoor in key public algorithm. Works at
> related SF startup. Doesn’t yet have enough details to go public.
>
> Should we:
>
> -   Nab him and begin the coverup.
> -   Infiltrate his office and friends and follow his progress.
> -   Do nothing.

He always left that last one in there just to make sure his ass was
covered. But it almost never got any votes.

He sent out the questionnaire and watched the results pour in. There was
the support from the kidnapping crowd for immediately seizing the kid
and figuring out the questions later, but most of the team supported the
more cautious position. Fair enough.

He looked to see what staff he had available and dispatched one woman to
get more details from the kids boss, just to make sure he was oblivious
and dispatched a guy to get to know the kid’s girlfriend. Finally, he
assigned an office drone to monitor the kid and keep tabs on his
progress. The guy who’d done the original work-up was still available,
so he pushed the task back to him.

Boy, this job sure was easier without the guilt.

* * * * *

Jason started noticing them at the gym. Guys that geeky didn’t work out.
And certainly not with those dorky glasses still on. And whenever he
biked anywhere he was followed by an unusually large number of white
Priuses. At first he ascribed things to paranoia — he’d been having
weird dreams ever since his visit to Miller == but when he got to the
office he ran some numbers and calculated the probability of seeing that
many white Priuses in San Francisco and realized something was up.

Dorks. Priuses. His work on NNA. What did it all add up to? Did the
media industry have some secret San Francisco team working on the NNA
backdoor? No, that couldn’t be — anyone the media industry hired would
be way more attractive. And then it hit him — the only organization that
fit the combination of stealthiness, geekiness, and obsessive control:
Google.

*Shit*, he thought.

He looked around to see how they were tracking on him. Open on his
screen was a Google query for white priuses in San Francisco. *Fuck*, he
thought, quickly closing it. They knew he was on to them; they were sure
to close in on him now. He quickly set up a rule in his firewall to
block all outgoing connections to Google servers. He watched his other
search queries, his email, his calendar, and his chats all go dead. Soon
his desktop search thing fizzled out too.

He tried to think of other Google products, but his officemate was
laughing at some stupid YouTube video. Oh, damn, YouTube. He blocked
that too, along with Blogger. In fact, he blocked the whole Google IP
space. There was time to figure out how to circumvent this stuff later.

He looked around for other Google products. Surely they couldn’t track
him with his Google tshirts. But his phone! It not only ran Google apps,
but a Google OS. He had to toss it. He removed the battery, ran a magnet
over the case, and tossed the result in the trash. In fact, maybe it’d
just be safer to toss his whole computer as well. At the very least, he
changed the password on his hard drive encryption and removed the
battery and power cord and stuffed it in his bag.

Shit, the dorks were at the receptionist. He had to get out. He ducked
under his desk so he could think. Soon they’d be at his desk. He
couldn’t be here. He vaguely recalled seeing some back door over by the
bathrooms, so he crawled that way. Luckily, most of the office was too
enthralled by their monitors to notice.

He snuck out the door and jogged to the BART station. He bought a new
ticket, with cash (just to be on the safe side — hadn’t he heard
something about Google beta-testing a new public transit program?) He
rode the train all the way to Bay Point, on the theory that getting as
far away from Google as possible would be a good idea right now.

He spent the whole train ride shifty and nervously looking at the other
passengers, seeing if any of them were suspiciously geeky. But few
people seemed to last the whole ride from San Francisco to Bay Point;
mostly they got rotated. So eventually he calmed down and tried to plot
his next move.

When he got off he began looking for a library where he might be able to
get an Internet connection. He was obviously a bit wary of using Google,
even though it’d be pretty impressive for them to track him from a
random library computer, so he went to
[scroogle.org](https://ssl.scroogle.org/), a site that let you do Google
searches while hiding your IP address. Instead of visiting Google
directly, you sent your query to Scroogle, which passed the query on to
Google and then back to you, after stripping out all the Google tracking
cookies and the ads.

For other Google products there was [Tor](http://tor.eff.org/), a clever
little app that encrypted your Internet usage and bounced it through
three machines around the world before sending it on to its intended
destination. At every step, your traffic gets encrypted a different way
and delayed a small amount, so that even an observer listening to every
single bit of Internet traffic can’t keep track of which was yours.

Think of it this way: Imagine you want to get across town without being
followed by a spy satellite that can see everything from overhead. Well,
first you leave your house — the spy satellite can see that, of course —
and you head to a department store. Inside the department store, you
toss your clothes and buy all new ones. Then, when you come out, you
look like a completely different person — the guy using the spy
satellite can’t tell which person leaving the store is you. Then, just
in case the guy using the spy satellite cut a deal with the department
store’s security cameras, you do this a couple more times with different
department stores. Finally, pretty confident you’ve lost the spy, you
head to your final destination.

Tor works the same way, only instead of you there’s your message and
instead of new clothes there’s encryption. You first pick out three Tor
servers (the equivalent of the department store) that you want to route
your message to. First you write out a note saying “please send the
following message to www.google.com” with the message and encrypt it so
that only the third computer on your list can read it. Then you write
out “please send this to [the third Tor server]” and the previous
encrypted message and encrypt that. And then you write out “please send
this to [the second Tor server]” and the previous encrypted message.
Then you encrypt that and send it to the first computer on your list. It
decrypts it, follows the instructions, and all the other servers do the
same.

Of course all of this was for nothing if you ever logged into a Google
product or even accepted a Google cookie — a special tracking number
that Google send out with every web page they serve. Most browsers
automatically save the tracking number and send it back every time you
visit something on google.com. Cookies were designed so that when you
logged into something like your email, you would stay logged in. The
first time you typed your email and password, you’d get back a cookie
proving you’d logged in. Then, every other time you visited the site,
your browser would send back the cookie and the site would know you were
logged in.

But pretty quickly, sites started using this to track all their
visitors. Instead of sending cookies only when you logged in, they sent
them to every user, allowing them to keep track of people even when they
took their laptop to a new place or disguised their connections through
something like Tor. Google, of course, does the same, giving every
Google visitor a tracking number that identifies their computer forever.

Thus, to be sure Google can’t track you, you need to do at least three
things: never long in, never accept tracking cookies, and use some kind
of anonymization of your IP address (like Scroogle or Tor). And that’s
just for the Web.

God, this was going to be hard.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Ten](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity10)


Sick
====

November 27, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/verysick)

* * * * *

I’m sorry I haven’t been keeping up with Bubble City. I’ve spent a lot
of the last few weeks lying in bed and drinking fluids. (With occasional
breaks to play Rock Band, much to the annoyance of my neighbors.) Once
again, I’ve been sick — this time, with four different illnesses.

I have a lot of illnesses. I don’t talk about it much, for a variety of
reasons. I feel ashamed to have an illness. (It sounds absurd, but there
still is an enormous stigma around being sick.) I don’t want to use
being ill as an excuse. (Although I sometimes wonder how much more
productive I’d be if I wasn’t so sick.) And, to a large extent, I just
don’t find it an interesting subject. (My friends are amazed by this;
why is such a curious person so uncurious about the things so directly
affecting his life?)

One of my goals for this blog is to describe what it’s like to be in
various situations and it struck me that I’ve never said much about what
it’s like to be sick. So I figured I’d try to remedy that.
(Unfortunately, being sick has made this slightly more difficult. I
started this post on thanksgiving and now it’s almost four days later.)

**Cold:** All the time I feel tired and woozy. My throat is sore and I’m
constantly searching for kleenex to address my nose. Sometimes I feel
too hot, like I’m burning up. I’m always thirsty. Concentrating on
anything is difficult. I just feel kind of wasted.

**Upset stomach:** Huge pains grind through my stomach, like it’s trying
to leap out of my body. Food is always followed by pain, followed by
running to the bathroom. I’m afraid to go out because I wouldn’t want to
get too far from a toilet. I’m always thirsty and the dehydration makes
me angry and confused. At times the pain is excruciating and even after
it goes I spend some time just reeling from it.

**Migraine:** Ever felt someone’s nails dig into your scalp? Imagine
that their nails are knives and they’re scratching thru your brain and
you can begin to imagine what a migraine feels like. Light, sound, touch
— everything makes it worse, making the most painful pains even more
painful. Even when you quell it with a pill, you still end up feeling
woozy and disconnected, as if the pill is just barely keeping the pain
at bay.

**Depressed mood:** Surely there have been times when you’ve been sad.
Perhaps a loved one has abandoned you or a plan has gone horribly awry.
Your face falls. Perhaps you cry. You feel worthless. You wonder whether
it’s worth going on. Everything you think about seems bleak — the things
you’ve done, the things you hope to do, the people around you. You want
to lie in bed and keep the lights off. Depressed mood is like that, only
it doesn’t come for any reason and it doesn’t go for any either. Go
outside and get some fresh air or cuddle with a loved one and you don’t
feel any better, only more upset at being unable to feel the joy that
everyone else seems to feel. Everything gets colored by the sadness.

At best, you tell yourself that your thinking is irrational, that it is
simply a mood disorder, that you should get on with your life. But
sometimes that is worse. You feel as if streaks of pain are running
through your head, you thrash your body, you search for some escape but
find none. And this is one of the more moderate forms. [As George
Scialabba put
it](http://www.bu.edu/agni/essays-reviews/print/2003/57-scialabba.html),
“acute depression does not feel like falling ill, it feels like being
tortured … the pain is not localized; it runs along every nerve, an
unconsuming fire. … Even though one knows better, one cannot believe
that it will ever end, or that anyone else has ever felt anything like
it.”

The economist Richard Layard, after advocating that the goal of public
policy should be to maximize happiness, set out to learn what the
greatest impediment to happiness was today. His conclusion: depression.
Depression causes nearly half of all disability, it affects one in six,
and explains more current unhappiness than poverty. And (important for
public policy) Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy has a short-term success
rate of 50%. Sadly, depression (like other mental illnesses, especially
addiction) is not seen as “real” enough to deserve the investment and
awareness of conditions like breast cancer (1 in 8) or AIDS (1 in 150).
And there is, of course, the shame.

* * * * *

So I hope you’ll forgive me for not doing more. And hey, it could be
worse. At least I have decent health insurance.


The Handwriting on the Wall
===========================

December 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall)

* * * * *

*I recently attended a talk at Stanford by Walter Bradford Ellis, a
too-little-known activist and writer on the issue of global poverty and
world hunger. It’s transcribed from a recording I made. The sound
quality was lousy, so apologies if I’ve mangled some of the specifics.*

Good evening. This is the first time I’ve spoken before a college
audience, and therefore I would like to take advantage of your presence
to ask you a few questions before I begin on my prepared speech.
Basically I want to know how morally committed the students at a typical
‘good’ school are, and while I know an audience of several hundred from
one school is neither large enough nor diverse enough to give an
especially accurate picture, still the results should provide a rough
indication of where the real truth lies. That’s sort of an interesting
juxtaposition of words. ‘Truth lies’ I mean.

Anyway, as I said, I’m interested in knowing how morally committed you
are. I must say at the outset, I am pessimistic. At any rate, primarily
what I want to find out tonight is how important it is to you for you to
act according to your own definition of right and wrong. In other words
I’m not interested in knowing what sort of behavior you think is right
or wrong but merely how committed you are to living up to whatever
standards of right and wrong you possess.

I was trying to think a few minutes ago what questions I could ask you
to find out this information, and it is very difficult to come up with
anything satisfactory simply because individual standards of right and
wrong vary so markedly. I had to pick a situation which seems perhaps a
little silly because it is so improbable, but that is because I wanted
as pure a case as possible—one which is in no way connected with any
existing world situation—so that your prejudices and preconceived
notions about a particular situation will play no part in your answers.

My hypothetical circumstances are concerned with a person who murders
innocent people, and I suspect that nearly every one of you will agree
that that is wrong. So please now imagine yourself to be in an ancient
country which is ruled over by an evil king who has absolute power of
life or death over all his subjects—including yourself. Now this king is
very bored, and so for his amusement he picks 10 of his subjects, men,
women, and children, at random as well as an eleventh man who is
separate from the rest. Now the king gives the eleventh man a choice: he
will either hang the 10 people picked at random and let the eleventh go
free, or he will hang the eleventh man and let the other 10 go free. And
the eleventh man must decide which it is to be.

Now if death is bad, then on average 10 deaths must be 10 times as bad
as one. So hopefully nearly all of you will agree that the eleventh man
should give up his life in order that the other 10 might live. But that
is not the question I am asking you. I’m asking whether you would in
fact make that sacrifice if you were the eleventh man—if you really did
have to decide whether you or they would die. And you knew the king
meant business because he did this every year and sometimes killed the
10 people and other times the eleventh depending wholly upon what the
eleventh had decided.

Now I am about to ask you for a show of hands, but of course I realize
that few of you know yourselves so well that you can be certain of the
correctness of your answer—especially if your answer is yes. So I will
simply ask you to hold up your hand and answer yes if you are any more
than 50% certain that you would make that sacrifice. Understand?

All right, all yes answers, please raise your hands. Let me see, that
must be about a third of you. That’s more than I would have guessed.

Now let me ask only those who are reasonably certain—say 95%
certain—that they would make the sacrifice to please raise their hands.

Yes. That’s more like what I expected. That’s at most a tenth of you. I
have a feeling that most of that tenth of you are kidding yourselves,
but perhaps human beings aren’t as selfish as I have always thought.

Now just two more quick questions. Same situation except that the king
says he will let his 10 hostages go free if you will go to prison for 20
years, otherwise he kills them. That’s an easier question to be sure of
your answer about than the previous one, so this time answer yes only if
you are quite certain—95% or better. All right everybody hold up his
hand if he is at least 95% sure he would go to prison for 20 years in
order to save 10 people’s lives.

Well that looks like about three-quarters of you. Again I think you have
overly high opinions of yourselves, or maybe some of you are too
embarrassed to tell the truth, but I sincerely hope you are correct in
your self-assessments.

Just one question more now. The king says he will let his people go if
you will agree to give him all the money you have and all the money you
will make in the future, except of course enough for you to feed and
house yourself and take care of all the absolute necessities. In other
words he’s asking you to be poor, but not so poor that it impairs your
health in any way. Again I’m asking for at least 95% certainty. All in
that category please hold up your hands.

Well that’s nearly every one of you! I’m very pleased; I hope you mean
it. Perhaps in fact you do this time. After all, since you have the
power to decide whether 10 people die or whether you give up your money,
if you made the other decision you would be killing 10 people in order
to make money for yourself, and surely that is murder.

I see some head-shaking—it looks as though a few of you disagree. The
king has said, kill these 10 people or I’ll take your money. If you kill
them, that is murder.

Look at it another way. If you are poor and kill 10 people in order to
steal their money, that is surely murder. But morally speaking, that
situation is exactly the same as this one. In both situations if the
people die, you will be rich; if they live, you will be poor, and it is
within your power to decide which it is to be. In either situation if
you decide that they should die in order that you can be rich, you have
put your happiness, or not actually even that, you have put material
riches for yourself above 10 people’s lives. That is the moral error you
have made and it is exactly the same for both cases. One is as bad as
the other and if one is murder so is the other.

Anyway, those are all the questions I wanted to ask you. I didn’t mean
to spend as much time on them as I did, but at least from my point of
view it was well worth the time. Thanks for your indulgence, and also
for your soul-searching—I guess those weren’t easy questions to answer
if you answered them honestly. Just be happy it was a make-believe
situation and none of you is likely ever to really be forced to make any
of those rather unpleasant decisions.

And now I’ll get on to what is supposed to be my topic: world hunger.

In 1650 the population of the world was 500 million (500M). Within the
next 50 years an absolute minimum of 500M people will starve to death.
The UN reports that around 10M people starve to death every year and the
problem is only going to get worse as the population increases.

Perhaps that figure of 500M is too large for you to grasp in abstract
terms. Let me translate it into something more concrete: if those 500M
people were all to join hands, then figuring at about 1,000 people per
mile, they would form a line long enough to stretch to the moon and
back—with enough left over to reach across the United States 6 times. Or
if you prefer keeping things more down to earth, they would reach 20
times around the world.

The US Army’s M-16 machine-gun fires 700 rounds per minute, or about 12
rounds per second. If you drove a car past the line of people at a
little over 40 miles per hour, you would pass 700 people every minute.
If you used poisoned bullets or some such deadly concoction, you might
be able to kill 1 person with every shot as you drove past. If you kept
your finger on the trigger for 10 hours a day, 7 days a week, killing 1
person with every shot, it would take you 3 years and 4 months to kill
them all.

It is a rather gruesome picture, and yet all these people—and probably
many more—are absolutely doomed to die in the next 25 to 50 years. And
it won’t be the quick, easy death of a bullet, but the slow, pitiful,
wasting death of starvation.

There is one bright spot in all this, however—the legions of the doomed
will not really reach quite 20 times around the world. Perhaps they’ll
really only reach 12 or 15 times around, for most of them are children
and their arms are short.

Opposed to these ravaged peoples of the world are the gluttons of
America. You yourselves are good examples. As future graduates of a good
college, it is surely within the grasp of most of you to be making a
salary, after taxes, of \$50,000 or more within a few years. How much
money is that? Well, you could easily take care of all the true
necessities of life for \$20,000, thus leaving you \$30,000 for the
luxuries. In America, anyone can stay healthy spending five dollars a
day for food. It is not even hard to do. If one really skimps, he can
stay alive and well for a dollar—for I have done it. If it can be done
in America for a dollar a day, it can surely be done for that in the
countries where people are starving. Thus your \$30,000 of luxury money
could be providing 82 people with a dollar worth of food a day—people
who otherwise might starve. Since presumably if your \$30,000 were
donated to UNICEF, they would take care to pick out poorer than average
people, I think it not unreasonable to state that \$30,000 per year over
a period of 40 years is enough to keep healthy 10 people who would
otherwise starve to death—plus a good many more who would otherwise be
malnourished.

So you see, I lied to you a little while ago when I said none of you
would ever have to make any of those three unpleasant decisions. You
will never have to make the first or the second—the two hardest
choices—but you are this moment confronted with the third: for the 10
who would otherwise starve are the 10 hostages, you are the eleventh
man, and hunger is the king. Thus if you decide to go on with the life
you were probably planning to lead, you will be letting 10 people die
rather than give up your flat-screen television and your cocktail
parties. And that is more than gluttony, it is murder.

Good evening.

* * * * *

*Aaron again. I’d like to make a few remarks about the speech, but
before I do I should admit something. The speech was not given by Walter
Bradford Ellis. Instead, it was written by a too-little-known
philosopher named Louis Pascal. He published it in the 1980s under the
same subterfuge in the journal* Inquiry *and it was reprinted in Peter
Singer’s collection* Applied Ethics. *(I have modified it to bring the
numbers up to date and shortened it a little to make it more
blog-sized.) He justifies the subterfuge as necessary to get readers to
more seriously engage in the thought experiment. I do think it would be
wonderful to have this talk given in person, however. If you are
interested in pursuing this, please let me know.*

*If you do want to help needy people, you can donate to
[UNICEF](http://www.supportunicef.org/) or
[Oxfam](http://www.oxfam.org/en/donate/).*


Judgment Day
============

December 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/judgmentday)

* * * * *

People don’t like being told that they’re bad. And they especially don’t
like it if it’s going to cost them a lot to be good. Finding other ways
out is preferable, even if it requires some violence to the truth. Today
we look at some ways people try to evade responsibility.

[Please read [the previous
post](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall) before continuing.]

A large number of people insist that “things aren’t proven” or “aid
doesn’t work”. In his 1996 book *Living High and Letting Die* Peter
Unger reports a study where he found that, including in administrative
expenses and other overhead, \$200 could feed a malnourished child
through the highest-risk childhood years. UNICEF [just recently released
a new
report](http://www.unicef.org/progressforchildren/2007n6/index_41403.htm)
finding that, for the first time, the number of children dying before 5
has fallen, thanks to their intervention. And Oxfam, to take just one
example, through its development projects in Cambodia [has helped over
35,000
people](http://www.oxfam.org/en/programs/development/easia/cambodia_development)
come to support themselves. [Doctors Without Borders
reports](http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/publications/ar/i2006/index.cfm)
that they treated 10 million people last year, treating 26,000 people
from cholera, for example, and treating 63,000 children for
malnutrition. Even the most vocal critics of aid, like William Easterly,
who has written many books and op-eds attacking government aid programs
as unhelpful, has to concede that private projects like Oxfam and UNICEF
are successful and positive. Nobody, of course, provides any real
argument against these things. They just say it’s “too unclear”.

If that’s the real issue, then [donate to an organization like Poverty
Action Lab](http://www.povertyactionlab.org/) at MIT. PAL does
controlled randomized trials of the success of aid interventions. Your
money won’t go directly to help people, but it will help to test other
people’s aid interventions and improve their effectiveness. [A recent
report](http://www.povertyactionlab.com/papers/J-PAL_briefcase04_web_01a.pdf)
[PDF] finds that mass deworming programs dropped infections by 23 points
and increased school participation by 25% (thanks, in part, to spillover
effects), apparently caused children to grow taller and healthier, and
cost only \$5 for each disability-adjusted year of life saved.

[Barry Kelly insists](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c1)
that he has no duty to help others and thus is not culpable for their
suffering. Of course, this is an irrelevance. Nobody is trying to put
him on trial — just arguing he should do more to help.

But Barry goes one step further: he says that he should not help because
giving his money to starving people would lead to “lack of incentive to
compete, lack of investment base for risky & experimental ventures, and
congealing layers of bureaucracy feeding on income redistribution.”
Taking this at face value for a moment, it is not clear to me why why
saving people from starvation would cause the first two — wouldn’t there
be a huge incentive to compete for saving lives and trying new
experimental techniques in doing so? Perhaps Barry means that the
first-world might have less competition in a field like, say, luxury
watches. I don’t see this as a tragedy. It amazes me that someone would
admit that they prefer to have millions of people starve to death than
to have a complicated bureaucracy.

In response, [Barry
explains](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c7) that “there
needs to be a cost-benefit analysis”. He does not explain what he wants
to analyze. Should we make a little chart with the benefits of
competition in the luxury watch market on one side and the benefits of
saving people from starvation on the other?

He also argues that we should do nothing about starvation because many
people die in car accidents. I am not sure how this is relevant, but I
deplore the deaths of people in car accidents and personally do not
drive because of it.

[Sohail provides](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c11) the
amazing argument that one shouldn’t donate to UNICEF because “They have
a business model that revolves around needy people. To keep the model
going, you need needy people.” It is not clear how this principle is
supposed to work. Are the people at UNICEF supposed to be quietly
sabotaging their efforts in order to preserve their jobs? Since
non-profit employees generally take large salary cuts and do
unusually-onerous work, this seems wildly unlikely. If they wanted a
safe job they would surely join the for-profit sector. Sohail provides
no evidence for this amazing claim.

[MC argues](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c12) that
people will starve since he no longer purchases their products. But
certainly fewer people will starve if he spends his money directly on
keeping people from starving as opposed to having people not starve
incidentally because he is purchasing TVs from them. Is he claiming that
the people not starving right now somehow have a special right not to
starve? It’s hard to see why that would be the case.

[That Hypothetical
says](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c17) that
“Development economics is a complex subject.” I’m not sure how this is
relevant. Perhaps in the ancient society the King has a lot of scholars
working for him making the issue of how to decide which person to choose
into some complex subject. That doesn’t change the moral issues.

[Mike Bruce says](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c22)
that if we all spent our disposable income on helping starving people,
we might face economic collapse. This seems absurd but also certainly
isn’t a question anyone is facing. Even if all the readers of this blog
spent all their disposable income on preventing starvation, that would
be inconsequential in economic terms.

There are actual arguments against the issues raised in the last post.
These are not them.


Bubble City: Chapter 11
=======================

December 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity11)

* * * * *

Jason was a man on the run: Google, with their paws in every phone and
PC from here to China, was looking for him. Visiting his friends was out
of the question; Google surely had all of them under surveillance. And
calling or emailing them was dangerous too. You never knew when they had
a Google-powered phone or forwarded their email to a Gmail account
(which lots of people did now just for spam filtering). But what if he
didn’t share anything private? He could at least send a message through
Tor telling his friends what had happened.

The library was closing soon, so he hurriedly composed an email for
Sarah:

> Dear Sarah,
>
> I know what I’m going to say will make you think I’ve gone even
> farther off the deep-end than I already have, but it’s my best shot. I
> found a backdoor in a popular algorithm and now Google is out to get
> me. I have to hide out for the moment, but so far I’m OK. Please make
> sure my friends and folks at the office don’t get too worried about
> me.
>
> I can’t check my email without giving myself away, so if you want to
> write back, purchase a classified ad in the *New York Times* — use the
> word “Sarton”.
>
> Missing you,
>
> Jason

There, that ought to be at least a start. This way at least Sarah would
know what was up and he’d have a safe channel for hearing back from
Sarah. Never any harm in having another channel for information, right?

Jason bought himself a pillow and spent the night sleeping with some
homeless people in a little cranny near the library that they claimed
each night. They had turned the unused nook into their own little
community, gabbing and singing and dancing until late, before curling up
in a dark place in a sleeping bag that looked like it had been left out
for several decades and turning in for the night. One by one, each of
them disappeared to curl up and Jason joined them. By the time the sun
and streetsweepers and cars awoke him the next morning, they were all
gone, as if their little homeless community had never happened in the
first place.

Jason looked out over the world just waking up — cars driving to work
before the rush hour traffic hit, a couple people scurrying by, shops
getting ready to open their doors — and felt like the world was full of
possibility. He stretched out and began walking into its gloriously
bright morning before he realized it wasn’t.

* * * * *

Trent knew that staying on top of the business world meant staying on
top of what was happening. So he grabbed an intern and headed to The
Butler and the Chef, a South Park restaurant for one of his espionage
breakfasts. Corporate executives from all over town came here to have
lunch and do deals and Trent made sure he stayed on top of what they
were doing by taking regular chances to come here and eavesdrop on their
conversations.

Of course, he knew that others were eavesdropping on his own, which is
why he brought along the intern: disinformation. “So, uh, what secret
projects are you working on, Trent?” said the intern in a stage voice.
“I’m glad you asked,” Trent replied. “Things at Newsflip have never been
more exciting. In fact, *don’t tell anyone this*, but we’re in the
middle of acquisition talks.”

“Really?” the intern said, looking a bit worried. “I hadn’t heard that —
with who?” “With whom,” Trent corrected. “With whom?” “Well, I’m not at
liberty to say. But let’s just say it rhymes with boo-gull.” “Wow,” said
the intern, genuinely worried now. “For how much?” “Oh come on,” Trent
said laughing, “you know I can’t disclose that.” “Oh, but just a hint?”
“Well, if you insist… It’s somewhere between \$200 million and \$201
million. A-ha-ha-ha.” The intern, knowing his options wouldn’t vest
unless he managed to keep his job for another six months, looked down at
his soup.

* * * * *

Wayne was having trouble sleeping. He showed up at his office looking
even more disheveled than usual. Even his assistant, who had taken to
spending the days chatting with friends on the phone and watching
YouTube videos, noticed something was up. “Something wrong, sir?” she
asked. Wayne mumbled and shuffled into his office.

It was this damn issue of the kid. Wayne knew, rationally, that it was
all for the best, but in his heart it just felt wrong to him. He felt
like he ought to use his influence to do something. But what could he
do? Why, he’d talk about it on his show, of course — Google money be
damned. He set up the video camera and began thinking about what he was
going to say.

“I know I’ve been a supporter of Google in the past,” he’d started. “But
I think they’ve finally crossed the line.”

He looked at himself in the video preview. His shirt was askew and his
hair in wild clumps standing up from his head. Everything looked badly
wrinkled.

“I’ve recently received information that they are chasing and
persecuting a young kid just beca—”

He looked into his own eyes on the monitor. And then he shut off the
camera. Nobody would believe him. He didn’t have any evidence. And he
certainly didn’t look credible. And then what? Google would go after him
— not only take away the nice office and the pretty assistant, but drag
his name through the mud. And God knows what they’d do to his search
results. Wayne shuddered to think of it.

No, he needed to work this from the inside. Get more information at the
very least. He put in a call to Samuel.

* * * * *

Sarah read over the email. Then she paused and read it again. And then
she freaked out.

* * * * *

“Hey, Samuel,” Wayne said. “Wayne, good to hear from you, what’s up?”
“Oh, I was just calling to talk about asking if I could come see some
Google people I wanted to talk to.” “Umm,” Samuel said. “What do you
mean?” “Well, you know that story you were telling me the other night,
you know the story about the kid?” “I don’t know what you’re talking
about, Wayne.” “Come on, the other night, at the bar, when you were
telling me about the kid you wanted to take o—” “Wayne, don’t be silly —
I was just kidding around about that stuff.” Samuel laughed. “Heh, you
took me seriously? Come on. You really think a company like this would
do stuff like that. Give me a break! Anyway, if you want the real story
you should just come by the offices sometime.” “Oh. Uh, okay. How about
today?” “Oh, well, umm, I guess that works. What time?” “Let’s say
around 3?” “Sure, come on by.” “Great, see you then.” “Great, bye.”
“Bye.”

* * * * *

Jason was upset. He was letting his emotional mind get the best of him —
hanging out with homeless people on the street and at the library,
writing letters to Sarah. He needed to think rationally. He needed
coffee.

He spent some of his little remaining cash on a large cup of coffee and
stole a newspaper from behind a register so he could diagram his
situation on it.

Here’s how it is: Google was using NNA to control the news. He’d found
out about this. Google had found out about him. Google didn’t want
people to know, so they were trying to stop him. He was trying to stop
Google.

The solution was obvious: he just needed to use the backdoor to tell
everyone about what he’d discovered and how Google had been chasing him.
Proving it would be hard but the fact that he could control the news to
force his story to the top would probably be proof enough. Google would
try to shut things down, of course, but that would only draw more
attention. There’s nothing Internet geeks hate more than having stuff
shut down.

So he just needed to use Tor to launch another exploit on the backdoor.
It’d probably require a few tries to get right and he’d have to be very
careful about covering his tracks and moving around, but it seemed
doable.

He was just about to fold up the newspaper when he spotted the
classifieds. He figured he might as well check for a note from Sarah. He
scrolled thru them, looking for the word Sarton. Then he found it:

> Dear Sarton, use your powers and say goodbye to the girl. Love, G.

*Shit,* he thought.

* * * * *

Back at the office, Trent ran down his list of priorities. Being the
boss meant there was just too much to do and far too little time to do
it, so Trent had developed a system. Actually, he hadn’t really
developed a system, he’d bought one that had come highly recommended.
And he didn’t practice it so much as give it to his assistant and order
her to do it.

She’d come back and insisted that she couldn’t actually do it all by
herself, that there were things like RAM dumps and reviews that only he
could really practice. “Oh, alright,” he said, “I’ll do the reviews. How
do I do that?” And she’d explained that once a week he needed to blah
blah blah, anyway, he just knew it was important to go over his
priorities and see how well he was doing at all of them.

“Spreadsheets” — he’d gotten those all off. “Boost morale” — his
meetings had almost certainly done that. “Welcome new guy” — oh yeah,
where was the new guy. He recalled him sitting over… hmm, his seat was
empty. He headed over, deciding to take a hands-on approach. “Hey,
anyone seen the new guy?” “Nah, he’s been working odd hours the past few
days.” “Hmm, well I guess I did say he could work from home. Hey, what’s
that your working on?” “Oh, uh, nothing.” “No, come on, bring that
window back, I want to see it.” “Umm, uh, yeah, here it is.” “Wow, this
looks great — I just have a few comments. This whole sidebar needs to be
purple and instead of a list of news stories this should show the blog
posts with the number of comments. And each one should have a little
picture — pictures are key; they draw attention.” “Um, right — yeah, I
guess so.” “Glad we’re on the same page — I’ll see you later.”

Trent headed back to his desk and called over his assistant. “Sandy,” he
said. “Tell Jane to meet me in my meditation chamber.” “Yes, sir,” she
said, and Trent watched as she rushed back towards her desk. He grabbed
the bag under his desk and headed to the meditation chamber. God, he
loved running a company.

* * * * *

Wayne got in his car and headed down the long Bay Area highways toward
Mountain View. He passed offices and billboards, trees and curving
streets, HOV lanes and overpasses. But eventually he ended up in what
could have been its own small city, a maze of office buildings and
little poorly-signed streets. At the center of it all was the famed
Building 42 complex, with its volleyball courts and dinosaur skeletons
and huge cafeterias, and sexy colorful architecture. But radiating out
from that were increasingly drab gray buildings separated by large
streets and parking lots where they kept all the real employees, the
people who stayed up into 3 in the morning to make sure that the Java
code that drew the sidebars of help pages worked properly.

As Google had built more and more projects, they needed an increasing
number of these grunt-work programmers. They had started interviewing
just about everyone CS graduate, in the hopes of filtering out the good
ones and luring them here to their artificial wonderland in Mountain
View.

Wayne headed for the lobby.

*Next year:* [Chapter 12](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity12)


No Superpowers
==============

December 17, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nosuperpowers)

* * * * *

I’ve been somewhat-obsessively following [the recent writers’ strike in
Hollywood](http://unitedhollywood.com/). It’s got a lot of attraction
for me. First, it’s a big, bold, public labor battle — the kind you
don’t see much anymore. And second, it’s filled with people I know.
(Yes, I’m the dork who actually tries remember the names of the authors
of the TV shows I watch.)

For those who haven’t been following, the story is something like this:
[Amazingly](http://images.salon.com/comics/bolling961125.gif), Hollywood
doesn’t consist of actors on soundstages simply saying the brilliant
lines that come to them in the moment. Instead, people called “writers”
slave away in darkness to craft plots and dialogue which are then turned
into scripts for the rest of the people in Hollywood to follow.

Despite their importance, writers haven’t been given much due in
Hollywood. They work as employees for studios who pay them money in
exchange for the copyrights to their scripts. Meanwhile, the studios
then turn the scripts into TV shows and movies that go on to run for
years, in reruns and syndication and on home video and DVDs and now on
the Internet thru streaming and download.

Writers have banded together to form a union, called the Writers’ Guild
of America, to make sure that, just like authors of songs or books, they
get paid when the things they write become a success. These payments are
called “residuals” and writers get them when their show reruns or is
sold on DVD. The studios have a contract with the guild, and thus with
all writers, specifying the minimum amounts they have to pay whenever
something like that happens. The guild then audits the studios on behalf
of the writers, makes sure they pay their fair share, and then
determines which writers deserve the money and mails it out.

Studios are still upset about having to pay writers for their work,
wishing they could keep all the profits for themselves. Writers are
still upset about not having negotiated a better rate for home video
residuals. Right now, when you buy a TV show on DVD, the writers get
0.3% of the price — something like six cents, usually. The studios want
to pay them the same pitiful amount for online downloads and pay them
nothing at all for online streaming. The writers, not surprisingly,
would like to get paid a more fair amount.

So when the contract between the studios and the guild expired weeks
ago, the two sides couldn’t agree on a replacement. The studios
basically refused to seriously negotiate and that refusal has been going
on (in various forms) ever since. So the writers went on strike: they’re
no longer allowed to write a single word for a studio until the contract
issues get resolved.

Instead, writers have been out picketing studio gates, making [clever
videos online](http://strikelife.net/%22notes%22.html), and trying to
bring the studios to the table. As a result, much of television has gone
off the air, because there are no new scripts to film. *The Daily Show*
and other nightly comedy shows disappeared immediately, writer-run shows
like *The Office* soon after that, and most of the rest are disappearing
as we speak. The studios are continuing to refuse to negotiate.

Along the way I’ve learned a great deal about the arcanaties of labor
law (many of which, like *Taft-Hartley*, are everyday words in
Hollywood), the oddities of Hollywood jargon (the Alphabet=ABC,
hyphenates=writer-producers, etc.), and read many gripping stories about
what it’s like to be [fighting for your
livelihood](http://johnaugust.com/). (*Note to future selves:* Don’t get
[in a written
debate](http://www.latimes.com/news/opinion/la-op-dustup11dec11,0,4960285,full.story)
with people who write for a living.)

But perhaps the most touching thing I heard came from J.J. Abrams, the
creator of *Alias* and *Lost*, and his partner Damon Lindelof. Both are
writers and both are bound by the “pencils down” rule of the strike,
even though they’re in the middle of filming the new *Star Trek* film,
presently Paramount’s biggest movie. [John August describes the
scene](http://johnaugust.com/archives/2007/strike-days-ten-and-eleven):

> Neither J.J. nor Damon are writers on the movie. But they are writers,
> and WGA members. During a WGA strike, you’re not allowed to write on
> movies or television shows, period. So they can’t change a word of the
> script, nor can anyone else. The script they had at 11:59 p.m.
> November 5th [when the strike started] is the script they have to
> shoot.
>
> To a screenwriter, that might seem kind of awesome. For once, the
> director can’t change things. But when it’s your own movie, it’s
> maddening. J.J. was describing a scene he was shooting the day before.
> Midway through it, he got a great idea for a new line. Which he
> couldn’t write. Couldn’t shoot. Couldn’t be in his movie.
>
> Damon described it like having one of your superpowers taken away.

I am not the director of a big Hollywood movie, nor am I striking for my
livelihood, or even doing much of anything, but I have to admit, that’s
how I’ve been feeling lately. Now that I’m [getting over being very
sick](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/verysick), I find that I don’t feel
terribly bad anymore, I just feel kind of tired. All the time.

So I go to finish up a new piece of software I’ve been working on (I’ve
got dozens, just sitting here, waiting for the finishing touches), and I
just can’t. I can’t type. I feel like someone who’s used to having
lightning bolts fly out of their hands but now all I get are little
sparks. Ssszzt. Szzzt. Bzzt. I’ve got nothing.

And so I’m stuck here in my room, lots of stuff I want to do, but
nothing comes out. It’s like having your superpowers taken away. Damon,
I really know what you mean.


The Theory of The Game
======================

December 24, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thegame)

* * * * *

I have to admit, there’s a part of me that gets no small enjoyment out
of the fact that the first piece I wrote for a paying publication is
nominally a review of a book on pick-up artists that actually ends up
spending most of its time on glosses the history of American dating,
discussions of foundational experiments in control of the emotions, the
history of behaviorism in psychology, and the computer functionalist
philosophy of mind. In other words, the typical article for *Other*.

I originally planned to post the review here to my blog, but instead I
bumped into Annalee Newitz while I was writing it, she expressed
interest in it so I sent her the draft I had and next thing I knew it
was getting included in the next issue of the magazine. Reading back
over it, I’m not sure I have a more to say in its favor other than it’s
definitely the weirdest review of *The Game* that will likely ever be
published.

A couple paragraphs got removed in the print version I have and the
editors added subheads to break up the flow, but here’s the original
piece as I sent it to them:

[The Theory of The Game](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/thegame)

> For a couple of weeks, it seemed like all my friends were reading a
> thick black book with a leather cover and gold-edged pages. “Is that
> The Bible?” I finally asked them. “It might as well be,” said one.
> “It’s a guide to picking up girls,” another explained. I scrunched my
> face. “Oh, no no no,” the smartest one there said. “Think of it as an
> ethnography of a community of pick-up artists.”
> ([More…](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/thegame))

If you like this kind of thing, consider picking up [a copy of *Other*
magazine](http://othermag.org/), available in indie bookstores across
San Francisco and thru the web site.

(*Explanation in advance:* I know fans of computer functionalism (what a
weblog to have such readers!) are going to attack me for my
oversimplification of their views. Well, if you want, I’m happy to
attack your views at length and the conclusion comes out basically the
same. So bring it on.)


Starting Out in the Morning
===========================

December 28, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/startingout)

* * * * *

“That’s how you discover a person’s true nature,” someone in *Starting
Out in the Evening* thinks: “by the way she wakes up in the morning.”

For a long time, I have woken up in the morning with nothing. Recently,
because I have been sick. Before that, because I was split up among many
jobs. Before that, because I nominally had a real job. I miss the days
when I woke up with purpose, when I lived to toil at some grand
accomplishment. The feeling that all of life is in the service of some
larger goal. It’s fantastic.

I have been finally getting over my too-long illness, nursing myself
back to strength by reading. When I was a kid, I used to take Saturdays
to read, really read, devouring five or six books in one sitting. I
haven’t read like that in years, but now I’m doing it again — checking
out stacks of books from the library and setting upon them one by one.
It’s fantastic.

And I don’t just breeze thru the pages, I roll around in bed and pace
the floor and sit in the bath fighting my brain around their words,
knowing that there’s some way it all makes sense, some way it can fit
together, if only I can summon the strength to grab it. I wake up with
thoughts of books in my heads, questions, anecdotes, stories. It’s
fantastic.

I feel like the books are bringing me back — back not only to health,
but to the world of thought and action, the world of accomplishment, the
world of doing something grand with oneself. It’s fantastic.


2007 Review of Projects
=======================

January 2, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/projects2007)

* * * * *

[In August](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/interruptdriven) I noted that
I had taken on an enormous number of projects and did not suspect they
would all succeed. (It has since been pointed out to me that one of the
secrets of successful people is that they try a lot of projects and then
you only see the successes. So perhaps this is not as bad a strategy as
I initially thought.) Now that the year has come to a close, I thought I
would review the projects I mentioned there and see how they were doing.

[Open Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/): Moderate success. Open
Library has a team of six or so people working on it. It’s not
progressing as quickly as I would like, but it is progressing. The demo
site has launched and there are no big hurdles in our path. Personally,
I’ve learned an enormous amount about managing projects.

Memoir: Failed. At the end of last year, I planned to start this year to
take a week to write a memoir of life at Reddit. The writing proceeded
on schedule but towards the middle of the week I fell terribly ill,
realized I would not be happy with the resulting book, and reluctantly
abandoned it. Why did it fail? There were lots of mid-level reasons (I’m
not that interesting a subject, my memory of the period was poor, I was
doing it with impure motives) but the fundamental one was that I just
did not honestly believe a memoir of my time at Reddit was a book that
was worth reading. I only lost a couple days, so this was not a
devastating failure.

Psychology book: On hold. After the Reddit book, I begun researching and
outlining a book about the highlights of psychology. I am still
interested in this book and think about it a fair amount, but I put the
project on hold after I started work on Open Library.

Another book: Unknown. In the other post I said I was working on three
books. I can’t remember what the third one is now. I think about
different books a lot but I don’t think I’ve pursued any others very
seriously.

Consult on Berkeley [Big Ideas](http://bigideas.berkeley.edu/): Failed.
I had no big ideas for helping this project and I did not follow through
on finding any. I had made no strong commitments, so I do not consider
this a serious failure.

[JobBook](http://www.blog.sethroberts.net/2007/10/30/jobbookorg-up-and-running/):
Intermediate. An initial site is launched but I have not spent a lot of
time on it nor is it progressing rapidly. Other people are pursuing it,
though, so I feel less pressure.

[Science That Matters](http://sciencethatmatters.com/): Intermediate.
This site has launched and a fair number of posts have been written, but
it hasn’t been updated in a while and nobody else has really joined
seriously. But the site hasn’t been officially abandoned, so it’s not a
total failure.

[Jottit](http://jottit.com/?partner=aaronsw): Moderate success. The site
was finished and launched and got incredibly positive reviews but hasn’t
really caught fire with traffic yet. Perhaps this is because it’s a
great product that no one wants to use or perhaps we simply haven’t
figured out how to market it yet. (If you want to try to market it,
contact [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).)

Statful: Intermediate. This was a project I mentored for Summer of Code
to allow for better web stats visualization. I was a fairly bad mentor,
in retrospect. A fair amount of the coding got done for this project but
I did not have a clear design in place ahead of time so the software is
not especially usable. If any readers want to help work on the design
for a free software web stats analyzer (you know, something that will
tell you who’s visiting your site) please email
[me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com). I still think the project is
finishable but it certainly has languished for a while.

[Seddit](http://seddit.revision1.net/): Failure. This was the other
Summer of Code project. The code got written but not tested or launched
and has since languished. The schedule budgeted time for launching the
project but apparently not enough. I think the lesson here is that in
such projects launching should be done first and features added later,
so that whatever results is usable. Also, I should be a better mentor.

Gmail clone: Failure. I got a couple of people started working on this
project but I didn’t follow through because I felt too overloaded.
However, people have since pointed me to
[Posterity](http://posterity.edgewall.org/) and
[Sup](http://sup.rubyforge.org/). Again, the consequences weren’t too
bad. I wasted some people’s time, but not an enormous amount.

Book reader: Intermediate. I finished 70% of this but never launched it.
Just never got around to it. The same was true of a number of other web
projects.

[Journalism](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/writings): Success. I had two
articles published for money and a third is on its way to the editor.

[Paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/whowriteswikipedia/): Intermediate.
Plagued by difficulties, the paper has been teetering on the brink of
failure for another year. I think a big problem was not having a partner
who had enough time to push me about it more.

[Novel](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity): Intermediate. I had
to stop working on the novel when I got sick but I mostly did it on time
when I was OK and a shocking number of people seemed to actually read
it. I will try to finish it early this year.

All in all, I think it was a fairly mixed year project-wise. A couple
minor failures, a couple minor successes, and a couple big projects
where time will tell. In truth, it may be too soon to evaluate this
year. If Open Library becomes a big success, this year will have been
well worthwhile. Otherwise, its legacy will be more mixed.


2007 Review of Books
====================

January 5, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2007)

* * * * *

*Previously:* [2006](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)

This year I only read 70 books, down from over 120 last year. I guess
that’s not too bad considering this was the Year of Other People — I
still beat my general goal of 52. Once again, here are the books that
struck me as completely worth reading. This year, though, I’ve
intermixed them with the other books I read:

-   Fight Club, Palahniuk
-   The Rise and Fall of the American Teenager
-   The Crying of Lot 49
-   Perfectly Reasonable Deviations from the Beaten Track, Feynman

George Orwell, *[Down and Out in Paris and London](http://www.orwell.ru/library/novels/Down_and_Out_in_Paris_and_London/english/)* 
:   The original *Nickeled and Dimed*, Orwell lives as a plonguer and a
    tramp in Paris and London respectively. The descriptions of such
    poor conditions are typically riveting and a great deal of
    fascinating reflection is included throughout.

-   When Prophecy Fails, Festinger et al
-   Classical Experiments in Psychology, Mook
-   Rhetorical Occasions, Berube ([reviewed
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rhetocc))
-   Incompleteness, Goldstein ([reviewed
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/godel))
-   Our Underachieving Colleges, Bok ([reviewed
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/underbok))
-   Way Out There In The Blue, FitzGerald ([reviewed
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intheblue))
-   No One Makes You Shop at Wal-Mart, Slee ([reviewed
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nobodyshops))
-   The Mystery of Consciousness, Searle ([commented on
    previously](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/searle))
-   Play It As it Lays, Didion
-   The Blind Side, Lewis

Hugh Laurie, *[The Gun Seller](http://books.theinfo.org/go/067102082X)* 
:   Hugh Laurie, the British actor (Americans know him as Gregory House,
    M.D.), takes his first crack at writing in this comic novel. (The
    novel was originally sent to publishers under a pseudonym to avoid
    celebrity favoritism, but naturally sales forced him to publish it
    under his real name.) The plot is a fairly standard spy-guns
    thriller, although very well executed, but the book’s brilliance is
    the way it adeptly undermines its own cliched language, to hilarious
    effect. In that way it’s a lot like the British TV comedy *People
    Like Us* (itself well worth seeing). A good, fun read.

-   Founders at Work, Livingston

John Searle, *[Mind, Language, and Society](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0465045219)* 
:   This book combines, in abbreviated form, the arguments in all of
    Searle’s work up to the time of its publication (which is basically
    everything except *Rationality in Action*). In doing so, it
    basically has all the hallmarks of Searle’s work, only more so: a
    clear exposition of complex philosophical ideas that demonstrates
    how to think better, useful tools to help you understand your world
    better, and genuine philosophical solutions that let you resolve
    confusions you may have had before. And all of it is done with
    Searle’s customary wit and style — almost an anti-style, like that
    of D. J. Bernstein, in which he simply explains things clearly and
    concisely. A model of public philosophy.

-   Freedom and Neurobiology, Searle
-   The Rediscovery of the Mind, Searle
-   Darkly Dreaming Dexter, Lindsay
-   Mind, Searle
-   Applied Ethics, Singer (ed.)
-   The Plato Cult, Stove
-   Responsibility and Control, Fischer and Ravizza
-   The Game, Neil Strauss ([previously
    reviewed](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thegame))
-   My Way, Fischer
-   The Social Misconstruction of Reality, Hamilton
-   Adam’s Fallacy
-   Intentionality, Searle
-   Writing in America
-   Intuition
-   Who Rules America?
-   Knowledge and Wonder
-   Things You Should Know About Captain Rick
-   Send In The Idiots
-   Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, Thompson
-   The Occupation

David Lodge, *[Small World](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140072659)* 
:   A strong, fun novel, packed with interesting ideas and characters
    and gimmicks, telling the story of people I love to read about:
    jetsetting academics. I’m normally not one for novels, but I have to
    admit it: Lodge makes it work. My only caveat is that this is part
    of a trilogy and one should probably read the first book, *Changing
    Places*, first, since later books refer back.

-   Searle, The Construction of Social Reality
-   Dawkins, The Selfish Gene
-   Hacking, The Social Construction of What?
-   Dawkins, The Extended Phenotype
-   Kitchner, Vaulting Ambition
-   Goodman, Growing Up Absurd
-   Gitlin, Inside Prime Time
-   Layard, Happiness
-   Thompson, Calculus Made Easy
-   July, No One Belongs Here More Than You
-   Searle, Rationality in Action
-   Virginia Tufte, Syntax as Style
-   Everything is Miscellaneous
-   The United States Since 1980
-   She’s Such a Geek
-   What We Wish We’d Known
-   Winnie-the-Pooh
-   How Doctors Think
-   Gawande, Better
-   Bukowski, Post Office

Adrian Tomine, *Shortcomings* 
:   Short, meaningful, and elegant. More than you could reasonably
    expect from such a book.

-   Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate
-   The New Ruthless Economy
-   Luria, Cognitive Development: Its Social and Cultural Foundations
-   Wall Street Noir
-   Bloodletting and Miraculous Cures

Saul Alinsky, *[Rules for Radicals](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679721134)* 
:   Including this is not quite right, because I cannot actually
    recommend this book without reservation. Alinsky is an anecdotalist,
    not a writer, and the first half of the book drags as he forces
    himself to come up with some general platitudes and lecture the
    youth of today. The second half, however, is incredibly fun and
    gives you an excitement and energy about accomplishing things with
    power politics that you just can’t get anywhere else.

:   Sadly, there aren’t any good alternatives I can recommend. Alinsky’s
    biography, *Let Them Call Me Rebel* by Sanford Horwitt, is quite
    good but has a few serious failings. First, it drags a great deal in
    the middle between the beginning of Alinsky’s career, in which he
    worked for Al Capone as research for his University of Chicago
    sociology dissertation, and the end, when he organized the black
    neighborhoods of Chicago and Rochester to fight the white
    establishment. During these middle years, Alinsky didn’t do much
    except watch three wives get sick and die and the book spends
    several hundred pages watching it happen. (Also, frustratingly, the
    book seems to be exhausted by the time it gets to the interesting
    end part and covers it in less detail than one would like.)
    Furthermore, the biographer apparently has come to severely
    disapprove of his subject, especially his habit of exaggerating or
    inventing stories about himself, that his disapproving tone takes
    all the fun out of the action.

:   Another possible alternative is Michael Gecan’s *Going Public*.
    Gecan is one of the top people in the Industrial Areas Foundation,
    the foundation Alinsky started and ran for most his life. *Going
    Public* is his attempt to go back to writing (apparently his college
    career) and tell the stories of the battles he fought as an IAF
    organizer. Gecan has much more of a flair for writing than Alinsky,
    but never got the chance to develop his editing skill, and the
    result is an uneven, sometimes overwritten, book. Also, Gecan’s IAF
    is much more watered down than Alinsky’s ever was and some of his
    tactics just seem downright silly.

:   There’s also Alinsky’s first book, *Reveille for Radicals*, but this
    can be dismissed as coming out during the early part of career,
    before some of the most fun stuff. So, because of the extreme
    importance it had on this year and because I have no serious
    alternatives, I have to recommend *Rules for Radicals*, along with
    everyone else.

-   Culture War?

Brian Morton, *[Starting Out in the Evening](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0156033410)* 
:   I read this entire novel in one sitting and it touched me in a
    profound way. It asks what it means to dedicate your life to
    writing, by looking at four people who come together, each of which
    has taken a different position in the New York intellectual scene.
    It’s also recently out at a film, which is a very bizarre experience
    to watch, because the book takes place almost entirely in the
    characters’ heads while the film will have none of that and only
    shows the brute actions. I’m not sure other people will have the
    same experience I did, but as a writer I found this book very
    powerful. By the same token, I’m looking forward to this year’s
    *[All the Sad Young Literary
    Men](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0670018554)* (and gleefully downing
    the new issue of *[n+1](http://nplusonemag.com/)*).

-   Richistan
-   Let Them Call Me Rebel
-   Quantum Theory: A Very Short Introduction



Introducing theinfo.org
=======================

January 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theinfo)

* * * * *

A lot of the work I’ve been doing on Open Library for the past few
months has to do with handling large quantities of data. Either I’m
writing crawlers to download them from various public web sites, or I’m
meeting with librarians to persuade them to give me copies, or I’m
evaluating algorithms for processing them, or building tools for viewing
it all.

And while I’ve been doing this for information about books, I’ve noticed
my friends doing similar things in other fields. Reporters try to get
large data sets to write stories. Programmers get large data sets to add
features to their sites. Friends are trying to make available data about
the inner workings of the government.

And while each community has ways of talking to each other — reporters
talking to other reporters, RDF people talking to other RDF people,
library hackers talking to other library hackers — there’s no community
that cuts across these topical lines. And that’s too bad, because
there’s a lot there we could share, from tips on how not to get caught
when crawling to tools to make it easier to build big charts and maps.

So that’s why I’ve started a new community site for people who work with
large data sets. It’s called theinfo.org and I’d really appreciate it if
you joined the mailing lists and spread the word.

[http://theinfo.org/](http://theinfo.org/)


How Dumb is Daniel Dennett?
===========================

January 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dennettdumb)

* * * * *

It continually amazes me how many otherwise-intelligent people I know
claim to be fans of Daniel Dennett, a bitter hack philosopher who spends
his days sucking up to scientists and writing personal attacks on other
philosophers. As Daniel Davies [put
it](http://econ161.berkeley.edu/movable_type/archives/001288.html), “I
used to be a rabid Dennettite [until] I started reading more widely in
the subject, and found that Dennett had been pretty (no, make that very)
badly behaved […] And that’s when the hate developed.”

At some point it feels unfair to keep picking on the guy, but I came
across a gem that, even after looking at it for months, still manages to
amaze me. Here, in full, is Daniel Dennett’s argument determinism is
compatible with free will.

(For context, this comes after pages discussing Conway’s game of life,
in which some deterministic animated squiggles don’t bounce into
(“avoid”) other animated squiggles.)

> It logically follows that:
>
> 1.  In some deterministic worlds there are avoiders avoiding harms.
> 2.  Therefore, in some deterministic worlds some things are avoided.
> 3.  Whatever is avoided is avoidable, or evitable.
> 4.  Therefore, in some deterministic worlds not everything is
>     inevitable.
> 5.  Therefore, determinism does not imply inevitability.

(Gazzaniga and Steven, p. 65, summarizing Dennett’s *Freedom Evolves*,
p. 56)

One just has to marvel at the sheer stupidity it takes to advance such
an argument, much less base a 368-page book on it. I mean surely in the
course of writing such a book you would come to notice that your core
argument is based around a *pun*. (Shame also on Gazzaniga and Steven,
who also base their argument on this absurd piece of “logic”.)

Yes, Daniel Dennett is literally arguing that because in some
deterministic animations depict things being avoided, determinism does
not imply inevitability. (It would seem an obvious corollary that Mickey
Mouse has free will.)

Why do people still take this man seriously?


A Very Speculative Theory of Free Will
======================================

*Previously:* [How Quantum Mechanics is Compatible with Free
Will](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/quantumwill)

*Attention conservation notice:* I am well aware that this post will get
me called all sorts of silly names and insults (Penrosian apparently the
worst among them). For once, I am not going to respond. I just think the
theory ought to be published and if you are not inclined to believe it,
then feel free to ignore it.

The big mystery of the mind is reconciling two things: what we know
about the physical structures of the brain and what we experience from
day to day as conscious people. The first tells us that our brain is
made up of a series of interconnected neurons which fire in response to
certain inputs. The second tells us that people have subjective unified
experiences and at least the appearance of free will. It seems hard to
explain how the first can lead to the second, although they’re obviously
connected somehow.

So, for example, if we’re looking at certain visual illusions, we can
choose to see them one way or to see them another way. And obviously
this choice has some impact on the rest of the brain, especially the
part that processes vision. But nobody’s been able to find the place in
the brain from which such choices originate.

I don’t know enough about the subject to vouch for it, but [this
article](http://www.quantummechanicsandreality.com/Primer/iia8_brain.htm)
claims that neurons are small enough that we could see quantum effects
in their high-level behavior:

> The juncture between two neurons is called the synapse. Each of the
> perhaps 100 billion neurons in the brain is connected to about 1,000
> other neurons. At the synapse, a firing neuron either passes a
> neurochemical signal to the next neuron, or it does not pass a signal,
> with the passing or not passing depending on the complex
> neurochemistry of the synapse. If, within a millisecond, a certain
> number of signals are passed on to a neuron, then that neuron will
> fire. Otherwise it will not fire. Thus what happens at the various
> synapses—signal passed on or not passed on—is the sole determinant of
> the firing pattern of the neurons in the brain. The synapses are the
> control points for our flow of thoughts.
>
> The synaptic gap, the gap between one neuron and the next, is quite
> small, 3.5 nanometers, which is about 35 (hydrogen) atoms. The sizes
> of the adjacent parts of the synapse, where much of the neurochemistry
> goes on, are also small, on the order of 3,500 atoms wide. Now one of
> the peculiar effects of quantum mechanics is that if the volume where
> an atom might be located (the place where the wave function is
> non-zero) is initially small, it will spread out in time. One can use
> Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle to show that a calcium ion, for
> example, will spread out to the size of the synapses (not just the
> synaptic gap) in about .1 milliseconds (see 8 below). Neural processes
> in the brain occur on a time scale of a millisecond, ten times slower
> than the spread of a calcium ion over the whole synapse.

So here’s the proposal: a series of entangled quantum particles at the
synaptic level allow for coordinated firing patterns which occur in
response to choices by our conscious free will. Just as my previous post
reconciled free will with statistical randomness, this would seem to
reconcile free will with the neuroanatomy.

It still seems incredible that there is some high-level coordinated
process with its fingers in the quantum effects of our synapses. But we
know something incredible is going on because we have subjective
experience. So this doesn’t seem like much of a stretch to me.


Election Slate: February 2008
=============================

February 4, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/election0208)

* * * * *

Being a newly-minted California voter, I’ve been looking forward to my
opportunity to exercise a little direct democracy tomorrow. (I’m not
taking a position on whether direct democracy is a good idea, but surely
if it’s there one might as well take advantage of it.) I encourage you
to vote as well; indeed, I encourage you to vote the same way I do:

**Presidential Candidate for the Democratic Party:** Barack Obama.
Between Mike Gravel’s inability to get more attention than a passing
mention from Wikipedia and everybody else dropping out, the choice is
apparently down to Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Hillary is the kind
of sellout DLC centrist who [cozies up to Rupert
Murdoch](http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/05/09/politics/main1600694.shtml);
Barack Obama can hardly be worse. Still, [he’s sold out
too](http://www.harpers.org/archive/2006/10/sb-a-little-bit-more-on-obama-1161881683)
and I vote for him under the illusion that he’ll somehow revert to his
community organizing, Iraq War-opposing, progressive old pre-sellout
self sometime before becoming President. False hope springs eternal.

**Proposition 91:** No. So bad, even its supporters are asking you to
vote against it.

**Proposition 92:** Yes. Community college is important and previous
propositions have been screwing it over for years.

**Proposition 93:** Yes. Progressives seem to oppose term limits, on the
grounds that they “shift[] more power to the governor and ensur[e] that
the State Assembly and the State Senate will be filled with people who
lack the experience and institutional history to fight the Sacramento
lobbyists (who, of course, have no term limits)”
([SFBG](http://www.sfbg.com/entry.php?entry_id=5430&volume_id=317&issue_id=335&volume_num=42&issue_num=16&l=1)).
I’m not so sure, but this seems like a fairly modest proposal which
seems to strike a reasonable balance.

**Propositions 94-97:** No. The only people in favor of expanding the
casinos while reducing their oversight seem to be their lobbyists.

**Proposition A:** Yes. Parks are nice.

**Proposition B:** Yes. Everyone seems to support this and if police
officers want to work three more years, who am I to say no?

**Proposition C:** Yes. I know rationally this is an absurd proposal,
but when you’re there, in the privacy of the voting booth, looking at
whether a geodesic dome should be built on Alcatraz Island, who’s going
to stop you from voting yes?


Very Good Introductions
=======================

February 22, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/vgi)

* * * * *

Oxford University Press has a wonderful series they call [Very Short
Introductions](http://www.oup.co.uk/general/vsi/). The books are small,
short, colorful paperbacks with titles like “The Brain”, “Political
Philosophy” or “The Tudors”. For each one, the editors find an expert in
the field, have them write a brief overview of all the relevant areas of
study (thus the book on “Globalization” covers economics, politics,
culture, environment, ideology, and the opposition movement) and edits
them to be clear and concise.

The result is a very good series of books, and I’ve enjoyed them
immensely, but it’s not quite what I want. For one thing, the shortness
of the books (they’re usually about a hundred half-size pages) makes
them unfulfilling. It’s impossible to get a real understanding of a big
topic in fifty pages, especially when many of them are taken up
summarizing related concerns. (Perhaps you could provide a nice overview
of economic globalization in fifty pages, but covering economic,
political, cultural, environmental, and ideological globalization in
that space is absurd.)

And the other is that, however great the editors at OUP, it seems
impossible that they would be able to commission the best exposition of
every topic for one series. Many of the greatest writers are not going
to accept a particular commission, do not approve of some piece of the
series’ style, or perhaps want credit or attention for themselves rather
than being just another book in a huge OUP series.

So that’s why I’d like us to put together our own series — not of very
short introductions, but of very good ones. These are books which a) try
to explain a whole subject with b) clarity and even joy while making c)
no strong assumptions of prior knowledge and d) not dumbing the subject
down. It’s an extremely rare combination — there are many books on
subjects that are good but unreadable by the average person, while
there’s a whole industry churning out pop sci pageturners that
communicate little actual knowledge of a subject. But the rare book that
actually achieves all four of these goals is a true gem, and ought to be
promoted more widely.

Please post your suggestions in the comments and I’ll try to assemble a
list of them next week. I’ll go first:

> *[Law 101: Everything You Need to Know about the American Legal
> System](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195179579)* by Jay M. Feinman
>
> This delightful book goes over the key points of constitutional law,
> civil procedure, torts, contracts, property, criminal law, etc. with
> wit, style, and lots of great examples. Sit down not knowing anything
> about the subject and come away with a clear enough understanding of
> torts, contracts, and crimes to apply the ideas in your daily life.

OK, your turn.


The Visible Hand: A Summary
===========================

March 2, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visiblehand)

* * * * *

*What follows is my summary of [The Visible
Hand](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0674940520) by Alfred D. Chandler,
Jr.*

Part 1
------

It’s difficult today to imagine what American companies were like before
the 1840s. They were small concerns, owned and operated by the same
person in one location, and focusing on a particular type of product
(cotton, provisions, wheat, dry goods, hardware, drugs) and one piece of
the distribution chain (retailing, wholesaling, importing, exporting).
Their corporate structure (the partnership), accounting techniques
(double-entry bookkeeping), and financial instruments (letters of
credit) were essentially unchanged from those used by the Italians in
the 1390s.

Bigger projects were pursued through personal relationships between
small firms: family farms had their slaves grow crops, which they sold
to the local merchant, who shipped it to his son or nephew in London,
who sold it to the local merchants there, and thence to the customers.
(At the same time, credit headed the other direction.) As time went on,
the number of intermediaries only increased: factors and jobbers and
brokers and dealers and commission agents. Coordination was handled
through the market.

(The one exception was the Bank of the United States, which had branches
in many locations and thus could coordinate on something of a national
scale. But it was politically unpopular and both the First and Second
banks were allowed to expire by Congress.)

There was incredible inefficiency, but it mattered little since the
technology of the time did not allow for great speed or volume. Canal
boats were still pulled by animals, for whom four miles an hour was an
impressive speed, and most products (clothing, furniture, clocks, nails)
were produced by hand in people’s homes through the “putting-out”
system. There were a handful of textile factories, but since they
depended on water-power there was only room for a few of them.

Part 2
------

All this changed with the railroads, a technological improvement which
allowed business to move their products vastly faster. Careful
coordination was essential (one didn’t want trains crashing into each
other), market entry expensive (constructing a railroad line cost a
great deal of money), and network effects powerful (a railroad was much
more valuable if it could move things all the way across the country).

As a result, the railroads built big enterprises, with professional
managers to operate them. The businesses were the first to be structured
along largely modern lines (the line-and-staff system): a board of
directors appointed a professional manager as president, who oversaw a
series of vice presidents supervising various company-wide topics
(finance, traffic, legal) as well as a general manager. The general
manager oversaw a number of divisions, each with departmental managers
with profit and loss responsibility and a staff of their own. Each
department sent statistics back to headquarters, allowing senior
management to improve overall efficiency.

In addition to consolidating various different roles into a single
organization, the railroads consolidated different organizations into a
cartel with a few large players who coordinated pricing schemes and
extracted the maximum each merchant was able to pay. The quintessential
player in this era of empire-building was the speculator Jay Gould and
his nemesis Cornelius Vanderbilt.

Gould got his start in 1868 when Vanderbilt attempted to seize control
of the Erie railroad, the nearest competitor to his New York Central.
Gould succeeded in stopping him and became the Erie’s largest
stockholder and president. He then leased two additional lines and
purchased shareholder proxies for two more lines, which he used to vote
new directors into power, who then agreed to sell the lines to the Erie.
(The courts and legislature quickly moved to stop him and the
Pennsylvania seized control of the lines.) He merged with additional
lines in Illinois, Ohio, and Michigan, before attempting to corner the
market on gold, leading to a stock market crash. The crash forced other
lines to sell, but Vanderbilt had more funds and bought them up.

Gould had more success in the telegraph industry, where consolidation
came even more rapidly. Gould’s railroads had contracts with Western
Union allowing it to operate telegraph lines along the road. He canceled
the contracts and signed agreements to partner with the lines attached
to several other railroads. After he bought ocean lines to Latin
America, Western Union was scared enough to purchase the competitor.
(Gould sealed the deal by offering Vanderbilt, Western Union’s largest
stockholder, a controlling stake in one of his railroads if he persuaded
the board to go through with the purchase.) After the sale, Gould
started a new company with the telegraph lines of his remaining
railroads, signed several additional deals, and announced plans to build
a transatlantic cable. Western Union stock plummeted and Gould bought it
up, becoming his competitor’s largest shareholder. He used this position
to persuade Western Union to purchase his competitor at an inflated
price and become the controlling member of Western Union’s board, a
position he used to fend off any future competitors.

Theodore Vail played a similar role at AT&T, while local utilities
(power, light, heat) ended up being operated by regulated “natural
monopolies”. Soon the nation’s infrastructure was entirely owned by
either public (e.g. the post office) or private (AT&T) monopolies. In
each case, it was operated by professional managers who planned and
controlled the entire system.

Part 3
------

The new national infrastructure (railroads, telegraph, steamships, post
office) allowed for new national distributors (wholesalers, department
stores, mail-order houses, chains) which were themselves organized and
managed in the same ways. Department stores, for example, had a manager
in charge of each department, with only things like janitors and
delivery people shared across the entire store.

Such big stores moved to also take the place of wholesalers by building
their own distribution networks and, in time, take control of
manufacturing as well. Large mail-order houses like Sears Roebuck began
building systems of conveyer belts and pneumatic tubes for ensuring
orders got assembled promptly — along with systems for punishing those
who held the line up. And the geographically-distributed chain stores
organized themselves under regional managers who kept tabs on local
performance with a team of inspectors.

Geographic centralization, automation, and employee monitoring allowed
such national concerns to move goods faster, which made them more
efficient than the numerous local stores they put out of business. It
was economies of speed, not of scale.

A similar speeding-up happened in production. The opening of the coal
mines provided cheap power for new factories with mass-production
machines while railroads provided a market their output. The factories
were set up as simple assembly lines operating continuous-process
machines, like those built to cut wheat, solder cans, and roll
cigarettes. Henry Ford extended this system into assembly with his
“moving assembly line” in which continuous conveyor belts moved parts
past the workers. In each factory, managers personally oversaw the line
foremen who oversaw each part of the process. By the 1880 census, 80% of
manufacturing employees worked in factories, with the putting-out system
remaining only for clothing.

Fredrick W. Taylor encouraged factories to speed up even further by
following his system of “scientific management”. He proposed a company’s
lines be run by a planning department which would conduct careful
time-and-motions studies to discover the optimal way to carry out each
part of the process. Line-level managers would then be responsible for
ensuring that individual employees kept producing at the optimal rate.
Few followed Taylor’s recommendations exactly, especially his suggestion
to place the planning department in charge of the lines, but many
companies adopted his ideas to accelerate their factories.

Part 4
------

The new speeds, in turn, produced so many products that the national
stores couldn’t sell them all, leading the manufacturers into
distribution and marketing of their own. They began building a regional
sales staff, doing national ad campaigns, and buying up competitors. The
result was national brands like American Tobacco, Diamond Match, Quaker
Oats, Pillsbury Flour, Campbell Soup, Heinz, Borden, Carnation, Libby,
Procter & Gamble, and Kodak — most of which remain leaders today.

Why did these few leaders achieve such domination? It was not thru their
superior technology — they leased the machines they use for assembly.
Nor was it their marketing acumen — they all hired professional
marketers for the job. And it could not be the power of their brands,
for they all invented these brands from scratch. Instead, it was their
superior organization that provided the main barrier to entry. Anyone
who wanted to compete would have to build their own national network of
managers, buyers, and salesmen.

And even this was made more difficult for competitors. The first-mover
was able to start small, use profits to fund growth, and use the
resulting economies of scale to lower prices while expanding nationally.
But any competitor would have to start out by competing against this
national, low-price network. They would either have much higher per-item
costs since they were producing so much less or they would have to
borrow enormous amounts of capital to build a high-volume network from
the beginning. And who would want to fund such a risky endeavor?
Newcomers did appear (Kellogg, Postum, Colgate, Babbitt) but they were
rare and the industries remain oligopolies.

Industrial products (lumber, petroleum, metal, etc.) also began forming
national oligopolies. It started with industry-wide trade associates,
which quickly became cartels that conspired to fix prices. However, the
incentive to cheat on the cartels by secretly lowering prices was too
great and, since cartels were illegal, there was no legal way to prevent
it. So companies moved to form trusts, in which one firm would hold in
trust the shares of the other firms in exchange for shares of itself.
When the Sherman Antitrust Act outlawed trusts, New Jersey stepped in to
allow the creation of holding companies — easy-to-establish corporations
which simply held the stock of other corporations. But in the early
1900s the courts ruled that even this form violated the law and the
companies moved to merge outright, forming a single corporation.

But such horizontal integration was rarely very profitable. The real
success always came from vertical integration: taking control of
suppliers and distribution.

Part 5
------

Managers who oversaw the factories carefully measured their efficiency.
They wanted to maximize the use of the expensive equipment they had
purchased, so the repeatedly pushed to speed up the lines and use them
more efficiency. This increased efficiency resulted in increased
production which resulted in corporate growth which naturally required
more lines.

At the same time corporations continued this within-industry expansion,
higher-level managers saw the generic processes at work and pushed for
between-industry expansion: reusing the same management structures and
same tools to grow the company and brand into new businesses.

And thus, managerial capitalism — the corporate form in which
professional managers ran large, national corporation whose owners had
at most veto power over their efforts — spread across the country. Their
administrative coordination allowed for greater productivity and lower
costs, but required a managerial hierarchy which could carry out more
functions. The managers also allowed them to increase volume, but also
allowed the managers to ensure a permanent place for themselves. The
task of management became more technical and specialized and management
became separated from ownership. As a result, managers were able to
direct the company in ways that favored stability over profits, and the
resulting huge enterprises changed the shape of the economy.


Review: The New Ruthless Economy
================================

March 9, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ruthlessecon)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_ruthlessecon)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195179838)

During the boom years of the New Economy nineties, new technologies led
to a boost in productivity and profits. But over the same period,
compensation for actual workers stayed the same or even went down. In
this book, Simon Head investigates the other side of technology: the way
it keeps the average worker down.

Head finds that “scientific management” — the system that turned
assembly lines into sweatshops in the 1880s — has expanded to conquer
the service sector as well. Where old management consultants reorganized
factories to deskill workers (by making them repeat mindless jobs over
and over) and regulate behavior (by having overseers and stopwatches
making sure they met their quotas), new management consultants
reorganize call centers to deskill workers (by having them simply read
scripts off a computer screen) and regulate behavior (by having their
computers measure how long they spend on the phone and at lunch and in
the bathroom).

But it’s not just call centers: Head finds the same technological
reengineering of business in everything from factories to doctor’s
offices, where HMO-enforced policies require doctors to do little more
than type symptoms into a computer and prescribe the recommended
treatment, with little time to investigate what might actually be wrong
with the patient.

Head’s argument is much like that of David Noble in *Forces of
Production*: we had a choice about how to use new technology. We could
use it to turn employees into ever-more-skilled craftspeople, allowing
them to be more effective and creative in their jobs now that they had
machines to do their dirty work. Or we could use it to turn employees
into faster cogs for a machine, forcing them to follow rigidly-composed
scripts carefully specifying their role.

We are once again choosing the second. Only this time it may hurt
companies, not just employees. At least in manufacturing jobs, you can
keep some kind of quality control tracking on the final product. A
Toyota may not be very good, but if everyone follows the rules at least
they will all be about the same. Service industry jobs require dealing
with individual customers in all their messiness. And customers don’t
make good components in carefully “reengineered” machines.

The result is things like the infuriating 1-800 numbers we’re all
familiar with: incompetent customer support, useless service, uninformed
advice. Which means customers walk away. As management cuts costs by
outsourcing their call centers to less and less skilled employees, they
also cut profits by alienating their customer base. (Head cites powerful
studies by Frederick Reichheld finding that tiny increases in customer
retention can lead to doublings in revenue.)

Head writes clearly and plainly, although the book lacks the concision
of his brilliant pieces for the *New York Review of Books* (which this
book grew out of). And while he does do some on-the-ground reporting,
especially from car factories, the book has more of an eye for acronyms
than for anecdotes. This is disappointing, because the techniques at the
heart of the book (the automated systems for monitoring employees) would
make for gripping reading, yet Head never gives us a glimpse of what
they actually look like in practice.

For those with only a little time, the key chapter (6) [is available
online](http://www.tcf.org/Publications/EconomicsInequality/ch6.pdf)
[PDF]. For those who want to dig deeper, I can recommend two related
books from the same year: Christian Parenti’s *The Soft Cage* goes into
more detail about surveillance technologies in all areas of life while
his friend Doug Henwood’s *After the New Economy* goes into more detail
about the economic numbers behind such things.

-   [Get a copy](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195179838)


[image1_ruthlessecon]: image1_ruthlessecon.jpg

Banff
=====

March 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/banff)

* * * * *

[![Banff
Storms](image1_banff)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronsw/2342213374/ "Banff Storms by AaronSw, on Flickr")

When you step off the plane in Calgary, there are, rather improbably,
men in cowboy hats. Albertans consistently refer to their province as
“the Texas of Canada” and apparently its largest city has taken the
notion to heart.

I take a ride with a man who appears to have spent his life preparing to
be the consummate businessman. His handshake is firm, his knowledge of
geopolitics impeccable. He is a master of the telling anecdote, the
commanding voice, the comprehensive but guarded answer. He has built
planes, been in bands, managed corporate strategy, and now he is on
assignment in Mexico, where he must staff up a factory to build planes
for a Canadian business that is wary of such “offshoring”.

He has gone, he explains, from a life in which he researches
technicalities for position papers on corporate strategy to one life in
which he gets up every morning, drives to a factory, locks the doors (to
punish latecomers), walks the line, and tries to figure out how to get
airplanes built and delivered.

As we drive, he demonstrates his radio contact to the folks back home in
Mexico. Right now they are trying to figure out how to get a plane body
they have built from Mexico to Canada in time for additional
construction to begin on Monday morning without breaking any laws in the
complicated patchwork of trucking regulations.

I feel endlessly inferior to this confident man of business, until I
discover he knows very little about technology or copyright law. He does
understand, however, that Google must be very popular, as he visits it
“at least two or three times a day”. I try to contribute something back
by attempting to explain some things about the subject, although I talk
too fast and don’t explain enough, so I’m not sure much was clear.

* * * * *

It is a long drive past a short skyline to Banff, a city that literally
resides inside a national park, one which requires a permit to enter and
in which no new construction is permitted.

Tourism most certainly is, however, and the city is dotted with hotels
and conference centers nestled into the sides of imposing mountains,
with glorious vistas in all directions. The hotel I am staying at is
almost comically opulent, with a Roaring 20s theme of sparkling black
gowns amidst weak white art deco lights. My room is huge.

[![Empty
Room](image2_banff)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronsw/2342213092/ "Empty Room by AaronSw, on Flickr")

At check in I am given my badge and binder and hat and vest. There is a
party that night at the bar. I want to soak up the discussions, to see
how the elite live and what they discuss, but I am too shy to barge into
any of the conversations. It is just like any other party: I sit against
the wall and try to remain inconspicuous.

* * * * *

The next morning I am scheduled to give a brief talk to this
self-described group of “young leaders” of Canada. Taking the stage
after the platitudes of a high-ranking Albertan government official, I
find myself on a panel on “the Internet and Mass Collaboration” (the one
technology panel at the conference) and am asked to give five minutes of
provocative thoughts. In a bright red t-shirt amongst a sea of suits, I
approach the podium:

> I suppose I’m here to be the brash young person from San Francisco.
> I’ll try my best to fill that role. For years I’ve been a user and a
> builder of these technologies. Most recently, I co-founded Reddit, a
> democratic news site which was purchased by the magazine publisher
> Condé Nast, and I am now working on Open Library, an attempt to create
> a Wikipedia for books. […]
>
> There’s a lot of talk, here and elsewhere, about how Internet
> collaboration is going to revolutionize business and politics. Just
> add some Internet collaboration, they say, and your business will
> suddenly start working better and smarter—and cheaper, as well. But
> the Internet is not this magic pixie dust you can sprinkle on
> anything. In the States, the back of every ketchup bottle now has a
> notice explaining that you can now create your own advertisements for
> the ketchup company. In return, well, in return they might use your
> ad. This is magic pixie dust thinking at work: people are not going to
> suddenly start designing your ad campaigns for you just because you
> asked them to.
>
> We have to remember that these things are done by real people, not
> magical abstractions. The rhetoric often suggests that some magical
> force of “peer production” or “mass collaboration” has written an
> encyclopedia or created a video library. Such forces do not exist;
> instead there are only individual people, the same kind of people who
> drive everything else.
>
> The power is that these people are collaborating. But they are
> collaborating because they have come together to form a community. And
> a community works because it has shared values. But here’s the thing:
> these shared values are profoundly anti-business. [Laughs from the
> audience.] I mean, look at Wikipedia. This is a group who wakes up
> every day and tries to put the encyclopedia publishers out of business
> by providing a collection of world knowledge they can give away to
> everyone for free.
>
> If you want someone to do your company’s work for you, finding a
> well-organized online community with strong anti-business values seems
> like a bad idea. [Laughs.]
>
> So what do you do? I have a friend who is even more brash than I am
> and when anyone asks her for business advice she tells them simply:
> Well, in the future, your servants are going to rise up and eat you.
> So, invest in toothpicks.

I quickly scurry back to my seat, afraid this crowd will rise up and eat
me for such brazen aggressiveness. But instead, I am cheered with
laughter and applause. Nobody ever addresses my toothpicks comment. For
the next hour, me and the rest of the panel answer questions from the
audience, and I comfortably talk about everything from the gender gap in
technology (which, I assure them, is worse than in any other field and a
result of the most disgusting discrimination and misogyny) to the future
of news (freelancers and aggregators, not institutions).

Afterward, and for the next few days, dozens of people come up to
compliment me on my talk. “So you do this sort of thing a lot then?”
they all say. I receive three more speaking invitations before lunch and
people repeatedly request to sit next to me at meals.

* * * * *

[![Michael
Geist](image3_banff)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronsw/2341384145/ "Michael Geist by AaronSw, on Flickr")

I spend a great deal of time with Michael Geist and his family. Geist is
invariably referred to as “the Lawrence Lessig of Canada”. A law
professor in the country’s capital, he writes a weekly column and gives
frequent speeches on technology policy (copyright law, net neutrality,
open spectrum, etc.). But unlike Lessig, who has an otherworldly aura of
fame about him, Geist is entirely down-to-earth, continually expressing
genuine shock at how boneheaded and awful his opponents in industry and
government are. While I spend most of the rest of the time explaining
things to people, I have to work hard to avoid doing that with Geist —
he either knows intimately or has actually worked on every relevant
thing I can think to mention.

After our panel is a panel on work-life balance, mostly dominated by
James Milway, director of the Institute for Competiveness and
Prosperity. There are two other women on the panel to balance him, but
Milway speaks with such booming confidence and authority that the other
panelists comments seem to just disappear. Milway says everything you’d
expect a right-wing economist to say: Canadians aren’t working hard
enough, they’re not working long enough, they keep spending time doing
silly things like increasing the minimum wage and engaging in rent
control which are just obviously wrong. Increasing vacation time will
just lead to fewer workers getting hired. This is all clear in our
regressions. Europe’s economies are dying; workers there are far
unhappier. And so on.

Afterwards I go up to him to argue with his economics. “You’re using the
standard economic assumption that the demand curve for labor slopes
downard,” I say. (This is economese for the concept that as you raise
the cost of hiring someone, people hire less.) “But every study on this
subject — from Card and Krueger to Michael Manning — finds that this
simply isn’t the case. Manning’s monsopony model, in which you take into
account that there are significant costs to changing jobs, finds that
all of your results no longer follow.”

Milway is a fast speaker and has boundless energy and he tries to talk
right over me. “Every—every—hold on there—every—almost all—there’s a
strong consensus in economics that raising the minimum wage is a bad
idea,” he finally gets out. “Sure,” I say, “but they’re wrong — when you
actually look at the studies that’s just not true.” “No, there’s a
strong body of studies—even in our regressions we find that.” We argue
for a while about the validity of the Card and Krueger work and he
finally asks, “What’s the argument for the opposite case? Why would
employers do that?” I try to explain the Manning model but halfway
through realize I don’t fully understand it. So I switch tacks.

“Look at what Card found when he was doing his research — employers were
happy to raise non-wage benefits to get employees but just refused to
raise wages, even when more employees would have made them more money.
They weren’t being economically rational.” “Well, there you go,” he
says, as if he’s won the argument. “If you don’t think people behave
rationally then we’re done.”

“But of course people don’t behave rationally!” I squealed. “Look at all
the research in behavioral economics — it’s blatantly obvious people
don’t behave rationally.” “Well then, you might as well throw away the
whole field of economics!” he shouted. “Precisely. I’m glad you agree —
economics is bogus.” He just laughed and stormed off, but not before
giving me a working paper from his institute.

We ended up sitting near each other at lunch. He was explaining that his
institute was completely funded by the Ontario government but remained
strictly independent. “So how’d you get the government to fund a
right-wing think tank?” I asked. He laughed. “Well, normally I’d say
we’re more middle-of-the-road, but I guess you’re right, we are pretty
right-wing. I don’t know. Harris [the previous major premier of Ontario]
started us but [the current one] loves us too.”

* * * * *

![Rory Stewart](image4_banff)

That night there was a talk by Rory Stewart, the other person I got to
know and enjoy at the conference. Stewart is an amazing fellow. An
incredibly handsome man, with a perfect British accent and the most
well-tailored suits, he nonetheless has the look of something
otherworldly about him. His face is pulled back and marked as if he’s
seen things no one in a suit that nice was meant to see. I adored him
from the first.

He somehow got it in his head to walk across Afghanistan and his talk
consisted of photos and descriptions of this incredible journey. he
begun in a major city and walked for years, depending almost entirely on
the hospitality of strangers in each town to keep him alive and moving.
He walked every day, through deserts and snowstorms, with company and
without. And what he found was an incredibly kind people, living in
terribly poor conditions in autonomous villages, with a passionate faith
in their religion (including such rules as keeping women out of site).

Stewart now runs an NGO in Kabul, which is doing the work that the
coalition forces in the country found too “low-priority” to do: clear
seven feet of garbage from the streets, build thriving businesses and
shops in the downtown district, and prepare commercial products for
import and export. Stewart spoke bluntly about the military mission and
the government, suggesting it was unlikely to do much good.

It was 11pm by the time the discussion was over, so I went straight to
bed.

* * * * *

The next morning was dedicated to addressing the most pressing issue in
foreign policy, perhaps overall: whether we should bring the troops home
instead of continuing to lose their lives maintaining an increasingly
violent occupation in a country we originally invaded under the guise of
fighting terrorism but in which we now remain because we fear it will
fall apart if we will leave. This being Canada, that country is
Afghanistan.

The day started with a passionate speech by the Afghanistan Minister for
Education, who pleaded for us to let the country take control of its own
affairs and to ensure “its greedy neighbors” (widely agreed to be a
euphemism for Pakistan) didn’t destroy it.

[![Our Distinguished
Panel](image5_banff)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronsw/2342215558/ "Our Distinguished Panel by AaronSw, on Flickr")

Then there was a star-studded panel, including Rory Stewart, an Afghani
PR officer, an Afghani citizen, the head of the entire Canadian Army,
the ambassador from Afghanistan, and the head of a Canadian government
development agency. (I don’t have the list in front of me, but I believe
that’s correct.) It was pretty impressive to see the head of the
Canadian Army and he was a pretty impressive fellow, equally fluent in
literature and philosophy as politics and warfare. But he steadfastly
refused to take a position on whether the army should remain in
Afghanistan, insisting that was a question for the population through
their government. Stewart cleverly began the panel by saying that
everyone in it had vested interests, including him, and that we should
work hard to try to derive the truth from their statements.

* * * * *

At lunch we hear the most amazing presentation. It’s a pitch for, I am
not making this up “Development-In-A-Box(TM)” — a system that (again, I
am not making this up), uses “preconfigured solutions … embedded in
business processes … automating compliance … [with] fully automated …
wireframes.” (And that’s just the part I managed to record — the rest of
it was far worse.) The presentation was complete with completely absurd
PowerPoint clip art: a cargo crate flying to world hotspots, a hammer
and sickle flying over a tank riding over an AK-47 pointed at a pile of
Chinese-made goods, all above a 3D banner reading “Less Clausewitz, More
Sun-Tzu”.

Adding to the sense of unreality, the speaker sounded like a broken
animatronic Abe Lincoln, placing bizarre emphasis on random words and
constantly speaking in a faux-upbeat tone.

The gist of the proposal was this: come up with a bunch of computer
programs and simple rules that can be followed in any country, no matter
how badly destroyed, to get its economy up and running so that investors
can come in and start taking advantage of it. It was a reasonable idea,
he explained, to get the economy started before a democratic government
was because that was how history had usually proceeded — after all, “the
US only let everyone vote like fifty years ago.”

I swear, I would have been convinced the talk was given by the Yes Men
if it wasn’t quite so bad. Even so, we were half-convinced it was some
kind of prank. At least now I understand why businessmen kept falling
for the Yes Men’s pranks. (To be fair, there was a bunch of pushback.
Not the least of which came from Rory Stewart, who pointed out that
entering a wide variety of countries with pre-written rules might not be
spectacularly effective.)

There was also a group photo in the mountains and some scheduled trips
around town, but I neglected to bring a jacket so I mostly stayed inside
the hotel, luxuriating in my oversized room and using my overpriced
Internet connection. But soon enough it was time to catch the bus back
to Calgary, and then to gritty, working-class San Francisco and the
literal view from the ground, not the metaphorical one they need up in
the mountains.

[![Banff](image6_banff)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/aaronsw/2342212674/ "Banff by AaronSw, on Flickr")

[image1_banff]: image1_banff.jpg
[image2_banff]: image2_banff.jpg
[image3_banff]: image3_banff.jpg
[image4_banff]: image4_banff.jpg
[image5_banff]: image5_banff.jpg
[image6_banff]: image6_banff.jpg

Welcome, watchdog.net
=====================

April 14, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/watchdog)

* * * * *

As you’ve probably noticed, it’s political insanity season in the US. I
can hardly go outside these days without running into someone
complaining about the latest piece of campaign gossip. I’ve mostly tried
to keep it off this blog, but it’s hard to not get swept up in the
fever. As someone who wants to make a difference in the world, I’ve long
wondered whether there was an effective way for a programmer to get
involved in politics, but I’ve never been able to quite figure it out.

Well, recent events and Larry Lessig got me thinking about it again and
I’ve spent the past few months working with and talking to some amazing
people about the problem. I’ve learned a lot and must have gone through
a dozen different project ideas, but I finally think I’ve found
something. It’s not so much a finished solution as a direction, where I
hope to figure more of it along the way.

So the site is called watchdog.net and the plan has three parts. First,
pull in data sources from all over — district demographics, votes,
lobbying records, campaign finance reports, etc. — and let people
explore them in one elegant, unified interface. I want this to be one of
the most powerful, compelling interfaces for exploring a large data set
out there.

But just giving people information isn’t enough; unless you give them an
opportunity to do something about it, it will just make them more
apathetic. So the second part of the site is building tools to let
people take action: write or call your representative, send a note to
local papers, post a story about something interesting you’ve found,
generate a scorecard for the next election.

And tying these two pieces together will be a collaborative database of
political causes. So on the page about global warming, you’ll be able to
learn more about the problem and proposed solutions, research the donors
and votes on the issue, and see or start a letter-writing campaign.

All of it, of course, is free software and free data. And it’s all got a
dozen different APIs to make it easy for others to build on what we’ve
done in their own work. The goal is to be a hub, connecting citizens,
activists, organizations, politicians, programmers, and everybody else
who’s interested in politics.

The hope is to make it as interesting and easy as possible to pull
people into politics. It’s an ambitious goal with many pieces and
possibilities, but with all the excitement right now we want to get
something up as fast as possible. So we’ll be developing live on
watchdog.net, releasing pieces as soon as we finish them. Our first goal
is to put up data about every representative and a way to write them.

I’ve managed to find an amazing group of people willing to help out with
building it so far. And the [Sunlight
Network](http://www.sunlightnetwork.com/) has encouraged me and
graciously agreed to fund it. But we still need many more hands,
especially programmers. If you’re interested in working on it, whether
as a volunteer or for pay, please send me an email —
[me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) — telling me what you’d like to
help with.

We only officially started work yesterday, so there’s not much up yet,
but hopefully it’ll give you a sense of where we’re going:

-   [Visit watchdog.net](http://watchdog.net/)



Slaves of Some Dead Sociologist
===============================

April 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/deadsociologist)

* * * * *

Imagine you were suddenly put in charge of Google. What would you spend
your time doing? Branding? The Google brand is pretty important, but
it’s not really something you can control directly; it’s more of a
side-effect of the other decisions you make. (If your legal team decides
to give up the names of Chinese dissidents to the secret police, that’s
going to hurt your brand.) Product design? Clearly this is also
important, but at a company the size of Google it’s too big a job for
one person — most of Google’s innovative new products are designed by
rank-and-file engineers. Strategy? This is a good one, and probably what
Google’s current rulers spend most of their time on, but I’m skeptical
as to how good anyone can really be at long-term strategy with such a
huge company. Hiring? Obviously hiring is pretty important, but even the
greatest group of people aren’t going to save your company if they waste
their time once their inside.

No, I think the most important thing a person in charge of a large
company can work on is sociology — designing the social structure of the
company. It’s the sociology that determines who gets hired, what their
life is like, how much freedom they have, what sorts of things they work
on, etc. Clearly these structures determine an enormous amount about the
corporation. And yet, strikingly, I’ve never heard of a single
corporation that has a high-level group devoted to studying and
improving them.

“Practical men,” Keynes famously wrote at [the end of his *General
Theory*](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch24.htm),
“who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual
influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.” And
sociology seems to have worked out much the same way. [Chandler
claims](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visiblehand) that the modern
command-and-control corporation was worked out just about identically by
several different people around the same time and its military methods
have been with us ever since.

Despite enormous changes in the kinds of things big companies do as well
as in the way that they do them, the actual structure of the large
corporation (with very few exceptions) has hardly changed at all. It’s
gotten to the point where even tinkering with the cubicle seems radical.

Since such questions are so alien, let me give a sense of the questions
I mean. For example, how do you hire? Right now, it appears that at
Google each team gets to hire people for its projects and then once
you’re inside Google you get to switch to another project if you like.
Why not have a team dedicated to hiring which tries to find the best way
to pick the best people as well as making sure they match a particular
company culture?

Also, how do projects get picked? Do you have a command-and-control
structure deciding what things need to get worked on from the top? Do
you let everybody work on what they like? Do you let the company vote on
what its priorities should be?

What do you do with people who don’t work out? Do you have performance
reviews? Bonus pay? Three-strikes firing offenses? Or do all these
systems just make working more frightening and problematic?

It seems to me any reasonable company ought to have a whole department
dedicated to working on these issues, studying the systems that are in
place, studying the kinds of things that others have tried, and doing
their own experiments to see if they can do things better. And yet, to
my knowledge, no one does. Even the handful of companies that do
something innovative with their corporate structure did it as a one-off
— they have no team dedicated to coming up with and trying new such
innovations.

Now normally when you discover that everyone else is doing something
wrong, there’s an opportunity for you to get ahead by doing it right.
But that’s much more difficult here, because these questions only really
make sense for large organizations and very few of us find ourselves in
charge of large organizations. For example, its arguable that [Fog
Creek](http://www.fogcreek.com/About.html) has done some things along
these lines, but it’s pretty difficult to tell since they’ve never had
more than a couple dozen people.

Instead, the real innovation hasn’t come from companies, but the online
peer-production projects, like GNU/Linux, that take contributions from a
distributed set of volunteer contributors. But such groups solve the
problem largely through eliminating it — they don’t have to worry about
who to hire and how to treat them because they don’t hire anyone.

Instead, most of the people who work on GNU/Linux are hired by other
companies where they must contend with the antiquated social structures
that those companies provide. And since those are the brutal facts that
most humans must contend with, it would be nice if more people were
thinking about alternatives.


Money and Worth
===============

April 20, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/moneyandworth)

* * * * *

The streets of San Francisco are lined with poor people looking for a
little spare change. Many different strategies are tried — some just
shake a jar, others call for help, some make specific small requests,
and a fellow I saw today just kept sunnily repeating “a nickel and a
smile will last a long while” in an endearing tone. Others, however, try
to earn their keep — playing music, doing tricks, selling special papers
like *Spare Change*.

I have a strong urge to help out the first group, those who simply ask,
but helping the second has always struck me as odd. People tell me that
it’s better if the poor receive their money by doing work, because it
lets them retain some dignity, but I’ve never quite bought that. After
all, how much dignity do you get when your income comes from people
patronizingly pretending to buy a newspaper specially created for this
ruse?

But there’s a much more serious problem with only giving the poor money
for doing things. It encourages them to think their worth as a person is
defined by their success in the capitalist economy.

Now there is a grain of truth to this delusion. There are many useful
jobs for which society can compensate you. (Although even that, frankly,
requires a level of non-useful skill at fitting into the general
capitalist system.) But that’s about it. There are many useful jobs that
society doesn’t compensate well. There are many useful people who can’t
do any of those jobs because society never trained them or gave them the
opportunities required. And even if, perchance, there existed someone
who cannot and even with training and opportunity could not do anything
useful, it seems clear to me that their simple existence as a human
being endows them with some inalienable value. (If human beings didn’t
have value, then we would have no one to do useful things *for*.)

People on the street don’t deserve our money because they can pretend to
do certain menial jobs. Nor should their sense of dignity be bound up in
doing them. Instead they, like everyone else, deserve our money because
they are *people* and if we cannot care for other people, then we have
precious little else.


Money and Control
=================

April 20, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/moneycontrol)

* * * * *

“I never give money to those people,” she said. “They’re only going to
spend it on drugs, anyway.” And what’s so wrong with that?, I wondered.
I can see why one might want to discourage Harvard students from
spending all their time getting stoned (although, I have to say, I don’t
see anyone doing that), but if your life is spent sitting outside,
hungry, cold, and miserable, drugs seem like a pretty decent use of the
money.

But, more importantly, since when is that your call to make? That you
live in a nice house with a bulging wallet and he lives on the street is
due to an enormous number of random factors that could just as easily
have been reversed. And even if you’re arrogant enough to believe you’re
a better person in some way — smarter, harder-working, more ambitious —
since when does being better give you the right to tell other people how
to live their lives? Is Tiger Woods allowed to just come along and take
the chocolate out of *your* shopping cart at the supermarket?

It is a sad fact of reality that you have money and he has none and
that, as a result, he needs the money to buy material goods. But no
*moral* consequences can be derived from this. Just because history has
given you the *power* to choose whether this person can acquire certain
material goods doesn’t give you the *right* to make that call.

Now it’s true, you don’t have to give him money at all. Most don’t. But
if you feel that other people deserve to live a life without privation,
at least let them choose how to live that life.

Perhaps an example closer to home will help. Remember when your father
offered to help you buy a house if only you went back to school? That
was the same thing — trying to use the fact that he had money and you
didn’t in order to get you to do what he wanted. For years, he’d been
trying to get you to go back to school; and you didn’t, because it was
your decision and you didn’t want to. But then he realized he could use
the money to control you. Remember how that chafed?

At the time you brushed it off as “his money, his call”. But don’t you
see how that’s not true? Whether you go to school or not was never his
call. And while it’s certainly within his rights to help you buy a
house, using that to try to and control you was wrong. You deserve to
make your own choices about your life — we all do.

Including that man there.


The Toolbox Does Not Shrink
===========================

May 11, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toolbox)

* * * * *

[![Book cover](image1_toolbox)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521777445)

For the past forty years, Jon Elster has attempted to explain things
ranging from the emotions to technological change. The result is dozens
of books (and even more papers) in three languages across four
universities. And throughout, his work has not just been exemplary
social science, but has always struggled with the question of what
social science *should be* — what kinds of explanations are legitimate,
which techniques should be used, and so on.

As he reaches his late sixties, it is understandable if he begins to
think of his legacy. That certainly would help explain his latest book,
*Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the Social
Sciences* (Cambridge University Press, 2007), a 500-page masterpiece
that I expect will be seen as the summation of a brilliant career.

It’s a book unlike any other and, as a result, unless read from start to
finish can seem bizarre, if only because one has little sense of what
the book is trying to do. It is not a guidebook, or a textbook, or a
piece of social science in itself. In short, it is nothing less than an
attempt to summarize an idealized vision of the whole of social science
in simple language.

The book’s foundational assumption (as implied by its title) is that the
goal of social science is to discover explanations for social phenomena.
It begins by describing what explanations are and discussing their
different forms. But the bulk of the book consists of tools that can be
used in explanations: emotions, norms, time discounting, weakness of
will, magical thinking, cognitive dissonance, heuristics and biases,
rationality, irrationality, neuroscience, evolution, externalities, game
theory, pluralistic ignorance, informational cascades, collective
action, cyclical preferences, institutions, etc. — in short, the entire
toolkit of the social sciences.

Just as amazing as the breadth topics is the way in which they’re
covered. Elster explains each phenomenon clearly and concisely, so that
any educated reader can understand them with little effort, without ever
sacrificing intellectual depth. His explanations are peppered with
examples from an amazing variety of sources: ancient history, recent
history, personal experience, the classics of social science (e.g.
Tocqueville), the great philosophers (Montaigne, Pascal, Mill), and
classic novelists (e.g. Proust). The result is a book which not just
introduces readers to the discoveries of the social sciences but to the
intellectual world as a whole. Bibliographical notes following each
chapter as well as the conclusion provide a rich guide for further
exploration.

And yet it’s not simply a compendium of interesting results in the
social sciences, but attempts to defend a particular conception of what
the social sciences should be. In the conclusion, Elster defends his
notion of social science as the attempt to discover particular
explanations for particular phenomena against the “soft obscurantism” of
the literary theorists and the “hard obscurantism” of the economists. As
part of this, he turns his back on the notion of rational-choice models
being an explanation in themselves, noting that their many assumptions
are in desperate need of empirical defense.

In response to an earlier draft of this review, Elster wrote “I’m glad
you appreciate the details in my book, but you’re missing the big
picture, which is that there isn’t any.” Instead of trying to build a
Grand Theory which explains all of social life, we should try to build
explanations of particular phenomena from the nuts and bolts we have
lying around. And “even if a dominant explanation of a given event or
episode is discarded and then resurrected, the building blocks or
mechanisms at work in the discarding and resurrection remain. The
repertory, or the size of the toolbox, does not shrink.”

For anyone who cares about social science, Elster has done an amazing
service in clearly describing the toolbox’s contents and defending its
importance.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521777445)

*This is the first post of Elster week.*

[image1_toolbox]: image1_toolbox.jpg

How to Fix the News
===================

May 12, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/deadnews)

* * * * *

Newspaper circulation continues to decline. The top-selling paper in the
country, *USA Today*, distributes only 2 million copies a day (half, no
doubt, placed outside hotel room doors). Around the same number, with an
average age of 71, watch *The O’Reilly Factor* nightly, with the number
decreasing as the audience dies off. Everyone quietly concedes the news
industry is dying. It’s the Internet’s fault, they all assure us.

But what if it wasn’t? The other day I heard a news program that was so
good that I wanted to listen to it again. And I’m not alone — all my
friends have been talking about it as well. And while I don’t have exact
numbers, it seems as popular as any one of those other news outlets.
That show? The *This American Life* episode on [The Global Pool of
Money](http://thislife.org/Radio_Episode.aspx?episode=355) — a
comprehensive explanation of the housing mess.

There were three things about the show that made it stand out from the
rest of the news pack:

1.  **It believed in the intelligence of its audience.** It didn’t try
    to pander with sex or disasters or quick cuts. It took a serious
    news story and investigated it thoroughly for a full hour, with only
    one break. And it didn’t try and dumb any of it down — it explained
    the whole thing, from top to bottom.

2.  **It didn’t assume you already knew the subject.** Most news stories
    on important topics are incomprehensible to the average person who
    doesn’t know much about their topic. Here’s a quote from a random
    news story about the housing crisis: “They said financial
    institutions have been unwilling to expose themselves to the
    mortgage market, and lenders are hesitant to lend to risky borrowers
    in a declining house price market after the subprime meltdown.”
    Unless you’ve been following the story (like the reporter,
    presumably) do you really know what that means? *TAL* instead
    assumed you knew nothing and explained every component and term so
    that you actually had a picture of what was going on.

3.  **It was done in an entertaining and conversational tone.** It
    didn’t treat the news as some important series of facts that had to
    be seriously conveyed to you. It treated it as something interesting
    they wanted to tell you about, a story that involved real people’s
    lives (who you got to hear from at length) and was full of genuinely
    interesting pieces. Look at that news quote above one more time. Can
    you really imagine someone sitting down and saying that with a
    straight face?

At first these things may seem contradictory — how can you believe in
the intelligence of your audience while assuming they don’t know
anything? how can you be entertaining and yet still explain a subject? —
but the more you think about them you see how well they fit together.
Being intelligent doesn’t mean you’re knowledgeable; it means you’re
curious. Which means you want to hear the whole story from beginning to
end and which means you might actually find it entertaining. And being
conversational prevents you from assuming the mask that lets you talk
down to your audience while pretending they only need to hear the
handful of new facts that you’re providing.

In every other field, that kind of formality has been dropped. Even
banks run advertisements these days about how their associates will be
your friend. And yet the news chugs along with its arrogant formality,
watching its audience get older and older, and wondering why its
circulation is declining.

Together, these three points seem like the recipe for a genuine news
show: intelligent, comprehensive, and entertaining. And yet, I can’t
think of a single thing that follows them. Surely in an era of
desperation and experimentation, the wacky idea of actually respecting
your audience has to be worth a try by *someone*. Anyone want to give it
a shot?


Science or Philosophy?: Jon Elster and John Searle
==================================================

May 12, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sciphil)

* * * * *

As the name suggests, the social sciences have often seen themselves as
an analogue or extension of the natural sciences and have from the
beginning aspired to their successes. Like many who want to duplicate
success they do not understand, social sciences has been obsessed with
duplicating the *form* of the natural sciences and not its motivations.
Just as rival music player manufacturers have tried to copy the look of
the iPod without understanding why it takes that look, the social
sciences have copied the structure of the natural sciences without
understanding why they take that structure.

The greatest success of the natural sciences is undoubtedly the laws of
physics. Here, an handful of simple equations can accurately predict the
motion of a vast variety of everyday objects under common actions.
Seeing this, social scientists have aspired to derive similar laws that
predict the behavior of whole societies. (Others, meanwhile insist the
entire project is impossible because the society will respond to the
creation of the law, making the law invalid — reflexivity.)

But reflection upon the history of the natural sciences will see that
this notion is insane. Physics did not develop thru attempts to discover
the laws that explained all of motion. Instead, various kinds of motion
(like falling objects) were described, rules for their behavior deduced,
and commonalities in those rules discovered. Eventually it was the case
that the commonalities were so great and the rules so few that a handful
of laws could explain most of the phenomena, but this assumption was not
made *a priori*.

Jon Elster argues that the social sciences should proceed in a similar
way: various social phenomena should be described, the mechanisms that
give rise to them explained, and the commonalities among mechanisms
discovered. Most of his work consists of practicing social science in
this way, with a few attempts at laying out a toolbox of these common
mechanisms.

Modern social science is so split between attempts at grand law-like
theories and modest essays of careful description that Elster’s third
way seems alien and hard to comprehend. But there is a clear model that
social scientists can look to: analytical philosophy.

Analytical philosophers do not take as their task grand law-like
explanations for the world. Instead, they set upon a particular piece of
conception — language, free will, ethics — and try to discover its
logical structure. In doing so they often develop tools they shared in
common with other philosophical projects.

This similarity can perhaps be best seen in the work of the man who is
Jon Elster’s closest equivalent in the world of analytical philosophy,
John Searle. In his career, Searle has addressed a number of topics:
language, intentionality, consciousness, social reality, and
rationality. Throughout he has taken has his task providing a clear
description of the phenomena and explaining the pieces it consists of.
And in explaining those pieces, he frequently develops tools that he
reuses in his other explanations.

Take the notion of *direction of fit*. Searle argues that all statements
have a direction of fit, which can be either up, down, both, or null. If
we imagine (by convention) that statements float above the world
pointing down at the things they represent, then statements like “John
and Jill are married”, in which it is the job of the statement to change
to accurately represent the world, have a downward direction of fit. By
contrast, statements like “I want to marry him”, in which it is the
world must change to match the statement, have an upward direction of
fit.

This notion, which Searle and Austin developed for describing language,
Searle later reused for describing mental states. Love, for example, has
an upward direction of fit, belief downward, and joy null. And in my own
everyday life, I have found the same tool useful in thinking about
various phenomena I’ve encountered.

Social scientists don’t seem to read much philosophy. I suspect most of
them see it as an alien culture consisting of, [as Paul Graham put
it](http://www.paulgraham.com/raq.html), “either highly technical stuff
that doesn’t matter much, or vague concatenations of abstractions their
own authors didn’t fully understand.” But perhaps they should, because
even if the technical stuff lacks interest (and considering some of the
topics involved, I’m skeptical that this is always the case), the tools,
and the way they’re wielded, should be a lesson.


Simplistic Sociological Functionalism
=====================================

May 13, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/socfunc)

* * * * *

(I thought I should talk about the other form of functionalism for a
change.)

Often sociologists notice a pattern in which certain attributes of a
social system fits well with a particular social structure. To take an
example I have at hand, Rosabeth Moss Kanter notes that because a
secretary has access to facts that could embarrass her boss, it’s
convenient for the boss that the secretary is entirely dependent upon
him for wages and status.

Unfortunately, these claims are often phrased as saying X causes Y.
Here’s how Kanter does it:

> The possibilities for blackmail inherent in [a secretary’s] access …
> to the real story behind the boss’s secrets … made it important that
> she identify her interest as running with, rather than against, his.
> Thus, forces were generated for the maintenance of a system in which
> the secretary … was to find her status and reward level dependent on
> the status and, hence, success of her boss. (*Men and Women of the
> Corporation*, 82)

Note that, although she is unusually careful to hedge her comments
(“made it important”, “forces were generated”, “maintenance of a
system”) Kanter is making a particular historical claim here: the
secretary could blackmail, which pushed the boss to tighten control. But
this is not the type of claim that Kanter, who’s research consisted
mostly of direct observation of present-day offices, is likely to have
any real evidence for.

Making such claims is problematic, both because most sociologists don’t
really know whether they are strictly true, and because they lead Jon
Elster to show up at your house and yell at you for hours. But both
problems can be easily avoided: simply rephrase such comments to
describe the phenomena as *effects* rather than *causes*.

Instead of saying a secretary’s ability to blackmail leads bosses to
tighten their grip, simply note that the boss’s tight grip has the
effect of weakening the secretary’s ability to blackmail. You get all
the same points across and nobody gets hurt. See? Easy.


Tectonic Plates and Microfoundations
====================================

May 14, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/microfoundations)

* * * * *

In 1915, Alfred Wegener argued that all the continents of Earth once
used to fit together as one giant supercontinent, which he later named
Pangea. [As Wikipedia
summarizes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Wegener?oldid=211296230):

> In his work, Wegener presented a large amount of circumstantial
> evidence in support of continental drift, but he was unable to come up
> with a convincing mechanism. Thus, while his ideas attracted a few
> early supporters … the hypothesis was generally met with skepticism.
> The one American edition of Wegener’s work … was received so poorly
> that the American Association of Petroleum Geologists organized a
> symposium specifically in opposition…. … By the 1930s, Wegener’s
> geological work was almost universally dismissed by the scientific
> community and remained obscure for some thirty years.

Today, of course, every schoolchild knows about Pangea. But for a long
time the theory was dismissed, not because it lacked evidence or
predictive power — it explained why the shapes of the continents fit
together, why mountain ranges and coal fields lined up, why similar
fossil were found in places separated by oceans, and so on — but because
Wegener had no plausible mechanism.

A similar problem happens in the social sciences. [Paul Krugman recently
noted](http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/04/02/bartels-alfred-wegener/)
that while Larry Bartels (in his new book [*Unequal
Democracy*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691136637)) provides solid,
convincing evidence that Republican presidents systematically preside
over slower growth and increasing inequality, most social scientists
don’t believe him because we haven’t yet identified the mechanisms.
Krugman:

> Now, I’m a big Bartels fan; I’ve known about this result for quite a
> while. But I’ve never written it up. Why? Because I can’t figure out a
> plausible mechanism. Even though I believe that politics has a big
> effect on income distribution, this is just too strong — and too
> immediate — for me to see how it can be done. Sure, Republicans want
> an oligarchic society — but how can they do that?

Bartels, for his part, [argues
that](http://press.princeton.edu/releases/m8664.html) providing the
mechanisms isn’t his job — his goal is to highlight the phenomena and
encourage many others to research the mechanisms:

> *How do presidents produce these substantial effects?*
>
> One of my aims in writing *Unequal Democracy* was to prod economists
> and policy analysts to devote more attention to precisely that
> question. Douglas Hibbs did important work along these lines … He
> found that Democrats favored expansionary policies … while Republicans
> endured and sometimes prolonged recessions in order to keep inflation
> in check. (Not coincidentally, unemployment mostly affects income
> growth among relatively poor people, while inflation mostly affects
> income growth among relatively affluent people.) In recent decades
> taxes and transfers have probably been more important. Social
> spending. Business regulation or lack thereof. And don’t forget the
> minimum wage. Over the past 60 years, the real value of the minimum
> wage has increased by 16 cents per year under Democratic presidents
> and declined by 6 cents per year under Republican presidents; that’s a
> 3% difference in average income growth for minimum wage workers, with
> ramifications for many more workers higher up the wage scale. So,
> while I don’t pretend to understand all the ways in which presidents’
> policy choices shape the income distribution, I see little reason to
> doubt that the effects are real and substantial.

When it comes to addressing such arguments more generally, the most
famous commentator is Jon Elster. In his classic article “[Marxism,
Functionalism, and Game
Theory](http://www.geocities.com/hmelberg/elster/AR82MFGT.HTM)”, he
insists:

> Without a firm knowledge about the mechanisms that operate at the
> individual level, the grand Marxist claims about macrostructures and
> long-term change are condemned to remain at the level of speculation.

(To be fair, Elster doesn’t make this as a general argument, but his
vehemence has led some of his followers to suggest that it is.)

To be clear, I think discovering mechanisms is important work. All I’m
arguing is that it shouldn’t be a necessity for believing in a theory.
Instead, I believe it’s an irrational side-effect of an emotional
distaste for gaps in knowledge.

As evidence, let me note that such demands for mechanisms never go more
than one level deep. Nobody has ever said, “Well, your theory that
people are motivated by greed is all very nice, but I just can’t believe
it until you can explain how greed is manifested in the brain.”
Neuroscience is obviously the microfoundation of psychology, but
psychological theories are regularly accepted without neuroscientific
microfoundations.

In general, it seems like such commentators support a double-standard.
Theories with mechanisms should be judged by their fit with the evidence
and predictive power. Theories without mechanisms should be judged by
the evidence and predictive power and whether you can think of any
plausible mechanisms. I don’t see how this can be justified. There’s no
reason mechanism should be privileged in the assessment of knowledge;
things are true or false, even if we don’t know *why* they are true or
false.

Indeed, it we typically only investigate the causes of phenomena once
we’re convinced that they exist. (Elster admits as much in *Explaining
Social Behavior*, noting that establishing a phenomena’s existence is
the first step towards explaining it.) So let’s stop making the mistake
of not believing things are true because we don’t know how they happen.


The False Consciousness Falsehood
=================================

May 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/falsecon)

* * * * *

American intellectual life has a large number of ways of responding to
an argument without actually addressing its substance — namecalling in
other words. You can say that someone is “blaming the victim” or
spinning a “conspiracy theory” or “assuming people are stupid” or that
they’re subject to “false consciousness”.

Most of these are kind of transparently silly, but even otherwise smart
people seem to think the false consciousness charge has some heft to it.
The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be
that to think that people are systematically mistaken about their own
interests is the kind of crazy idea that only vulgar Marxists would
believe and, furthermore, it requires assuming that people are stupid
and explaining how you’ve been able to see past the illusion.

Well, I’m personally not under any illusion that providing a rational
explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge, but I
figure one ought to, if only to set the record straight.

Let’s begin with a parable — a simplified case that will at least
establish whether some of these arguments are logically true. Imagine a
new regime comes to power that decides to imprison everyone with red
hair. They insist that there is nothing amiss about this — they were
elected democratically, and furthermore, everyone imprisoned is still
allowed to vote. But inside the prisons, they only permit limited
contact with the outside world. Most prisoners only watch the one
prison-provided news station which is systematically biased, constantly
suggesting that the Purple Party is in favor of additional rights for
red-haired people while their opponents, the Yellow Party, just used the
red-haired issue for pandering. (Anyone who’s watched, say, Fox News
discuss black issues will know how this is possible.) The result is that
when election time rolls around, the majority of red-haired prisoners
vote for the Purple Party candidate who gets into power and provides no
new rights for them.

Call it false consciousness or not, I think it’s perfectly reasonable to
look at this situation and say while the red-haired prisoners are not
stupid, they are systematically mistaken, which is leading them to act
against their own interests. If they knew the truth they would vote for
the Yellow Party, the party which wants to take steps to get them out of
prison, instead. Furthermore, it’s possible to imagine that there are
some prisoners who, through one means or another, have learned this and
thus are able to see this situation while the other prisoners do not.
(They try to tell the other prisoners what’s going on, but they keep
getting labeled conspiracy theorists.)

Now obviously vast portions of America are not imprisoned. But most
people do get their news from a small number of sources and I think
everyone would agree that, in one way or another, these sources are
systematically biased. (You can argue about which way they’re biased or
whether it makes a difference, but I think it’s pretty clear that all
the major news sources share a general conception of what is “news” and
what isn’t.) So why is it so implausible that something similar is going
on?

The major difference between the two scenarios is that in the first,
people were basically forced to watch the biased news, while in the real
world they have lots of other alternatives. But I’m not sure this
matters as much as it might seem at first.

First, most people have busy lives that don’t revolve around the news or
politics and thus are going to get the news in the most convenient form
they can. For most people, this is typically television or the
newspaper. But starting a new television station or newspaper is very
expensive, especially if you want it to have wide reach, and the only
projects that can get funding and advertising are those that buy into at
least some of the systematic biases. So for most people, there simply
isn’t a better alternative when it comes to the formats they want.

Second, even if someone gets their news from the Internet or another
source where getting started is less expensive, they may not know about
the alternatives. If you grew up with your parents reading the *New York
Times* you may simply live your life checking in on nytimes.com, without
ever stopping to wonder whether the news you were getting was
systematically biased and whether there was some more preferable
alternative.

Again, just as there was no way for the prisoners to know they were
being lied to, it’s not really reasonable for the average person to
figure out that they’re getting biased news if the only news they read
comes from biased sources.

Now I’m not arguing here that this idea is *true* (that would require
more real-world evidence), merely that it’s possible. The fact is that
we live in a world where most people get their information about what’s
going on from a very small number of sources which tend to report
largely the same things in the same way. This seems like a rather
important fact of life and I think we ought to stop dismissing
suggestions that it might have some negative effects on people out of
hand.


How to Promote Startups
=======================

June 9, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/prostartup)

* * * * *

When people talk about how government can promote startups, there seems
to be a fairly standard consensus: we need more economic inequality.
[Lower income](http://www.paulgraham.com/inequality.html) and [capital
gains](http://www.paulgraham.com/america.html) taxes provide more
incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire
non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment
capital.

But having been through a startup myself, I think there’s much more you
can do in the other direction: decreasing economic inequality. People
love starting companies. You get to be your own boss, work on something
you love, do something new and exciting, and get lots of attention. As
Daniel Brook points out in *The Trap*, 28% of Americans have considered
starting their own business. And yet only 7% actually do.

What holds them back? The lack of a social safety net. A friend of mine,
a brilliant young technologist who’s been featured everywhere from PBS
to Salon, stayed in academia and the corporate world while all of her
friends were starting companies and getting rich. Why? Because she
couldn’t afford to lose her health insurance. Between skyrocketing
prices and preexisting condition exclusions, it’s almost impossible for
anyone who isn’t in perfect health to quit their job. (I only managed
because I was on a government plan.)

Anyone with children is also straight out. Startup founders tend to be
quite young, in no small part because no one can afford to support a
family on a startup founder’s salary. But if we had universal child
care, that would be much less of an issue. Parents would be free to
pursue their dreams, knowing that their children were taken care of. And
universal higher education could let parents spend their savings on
getting a business started, instead of their children’s tuition. Plus,
it’d give many more kids the training and confidence they needed to
start a company.

And those large private wealth funds that result from growing
inequality? A real problem for startup founders is that they’re *too
large*. It used to be that you could borrow a couple thousand dollars
from friends and neighbors to get your business off the ground.
Nowadays, they’re too busy trying to make ends meet to be able to afford
anything like that. Meanwhile, those large wealth funds I mentioned are
now so big they can only afford to invest in multi-million dollar chunks
— much more than the average founder needs, or can even justify. And the
large investments come with large amounts of scrutiny, further narrowing
the recipient pool.

But imagine if the government provided a basic minimum income, like
Richard Nixon once proposed. Instead of having to save up (increasingly
difficult in a world in which the only way to survive is on credit card
debt) or borrow money to stay afloat, you could live off the
government-provided income as you got things started. Suddenly having to
quit your job would no longer be such a huge leap — there’d be a real
social safety net to catch you. (Not to mention if those labor laws some
people want to loosen required your old job to take you back if things
didn’t work out.)

Of course, there is some truth to the standard proposals. Some startup
founders are encouraged by dreams of financial security, and high taxes
can make that dream more elusive. And complex labor regulations can make
it difficult to get new companies off the ground. But it’s not an issue
of whether we should have taxes or labor laws — it’s an issue of how
they’re targeted.

Estate taxes on inherited fortunes would have basically no impact on
startup founders, but could go a long way to funding a social safety
net. And since most startups are acquired as stock, income taxes are
basically irrelevant — it’s really capital gains tax that gets applied.
There’s no reason the government couldn’t apply a lower capital gains
tax to startups that get acquired than they do to the shares of
publicly-traded companies that large investors trade.

The same is true for labor laws: preventing large companies from firing
people at random can provide some much-needed stability to their lives,
especially if they’re saving up money in the hopes of going into
business themselves. But there’s no reason such laws also have to be
applied to small startups, where the company is more likely to go out of
business than to fire you.

Look at social democratic Europe, where these policy prescriptions have
been tried. While there’s much less of a culture of entrepreneurship and
only 15% of Europeans think about starting their own company, nearly all
(14.7%) of them actually go ahead and do it.

The fact is, if governments really want to promote startups and the
economic innovation they bring, they shouldn’t listen to the standard
refrain of cut taxes and deregulate. They need to start rebuilding the
social safety net, so that their citizens know that if they go out on a
limb and try something risky, someone will be there to catch them if
things don’t work out.

*Thanks to Daniel Brook’s book* [The Trap: Selling Out to Stay Afloat in
Winner-Take-All America](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088016) *for
suggesting this line of argument and providing the statistics.*


Is Undercover Over?
===================

June 12, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/undercoverover)

* * * * *

My latest piece for *Extra!* is now up:

[Is Undercover Over?: Disguise seen as deceit by timid
journalists](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=3391)

It’s about the rise and fall of undercover journalism. Here’s an
excerpt:

> Undercover reporting has a storied history. Nellie Bly, famous for
> traveling around the world in 80 days, also did a famed investigation
> of the conditions in insane asylums for the New York World. Bly
> feigned insanity for a series of physicians before being committed to
> a lunatic asylum. There she documented rotten and spoiled food,
> freezing living conditions, frigid bathwater, abusive nurses and
> relatively sane fellow residents. “What, excepting torture, would
> produce insanity quicker than this treatment?” she wondered. The
> series, later published as the book Ten Days in a Mad-House, created a
> sensation, and Bly was asked to join a government investigation of
> asylum conditions.


Moving On
=========

June 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/movingon)

* * * * *

In November 2006, I moved to San Francisco because I had to: my company
got acquired and us moving out was a condition of the agreement. It was
the first time I’d ever actually lived in San Francisco, as opposed to
just visiting, and I quickly realized that although it was a fun place
to visit, I couldn’t stand living here.

Even after all this time, I can’t really put my finger on what it is I
don’t like — in fact, I suspect it’s probably harder for me now to
explain it than it was when I first came here. The first thing that
comes to mind is how *loud* the city is. I want a place where I can live
quietly and focus on my work; but San Francisco is filled with
distractions. There are always crews tearing up the street, trains that
are delayed, buses that have broken down, homeless people begging,
friends having parties, and so on. It’s impossible to concentrate and
without my concentration, I feel less like me.

The other big problem is that San Francisco is fairly shallow. When I go
to coffee shops or restaurants I can’t avoid people talking about load
balancers or databases. The conversations are boring and obsessed with
technical trivia, or worse, business antics. I don’t see people reading
books — even at the library, all the people are in line for the computer
terminals or the DVD rack — and people at parties seem uninterested in
intellectual conversation.

And so I’m moving back to Cambridge, Massachusetts — Harvard Square in
particular, the one place I’ve ever been to that brings a special
delight to my eyes, that warms my heart just to see. Surrounded by
Harvard and MIT and Tufts and BC and BU and on and on it’s a city of
thinking and of books, of quiet contemplation and peaceful
concentration. And it has actual weather, with real snow and seasons and
everything, not this time-stands-still sun that San Francisco insists
upon.

I miss Boston; I’m excited to go back.

But I’m also sad to leave my responsibilities in San Francisco. One of
which I’d particularly like your help with. I’ve been honored and
overjoyed to help Lawrence Lessig get his [Change
Congress](http://change-congress.org/) project off the ground. If you
haven’t heard, he’s trying to build a national movement to get the
corruption out of Congress; to pass public financing of public
elections, earmark reform, and other pressing concerns.

But they need a full-time day-to-day tech organizer. Someone who knows
how to blog and who the bloggers are and can keep them in touch with the
community. Someone who knows enough about technology to know the tools
that can be built and should be. And someone with enough drive and
talent to make sure those things get built. It’s a dreamy job and I hope
there’s someone out there who will take it from me. [A more formal
write-up](http://change-congress.org/blog/2008/06/13/lawrence-lessig-and-joe-trippi-are-looking-best-ne)
is on the Change Congress blog.

Thanks for everything.


Last Goodbyes
=============

June 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lastgoodbyes)

* * * * *

It’s minutes to midnight and I’m hurriedly packing. Early tomorrow
morning I catch a flight to Boston and start [my new
life](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/movingon). I haven’t really gotten much
of a chance to pack until now, because I’ve spent the past few days in a
rush of meetings, getting in my last goodbyes for everyone I know in San
Francisco.

It’s been great seeing everyone, but like most locals, they’re all
puzzled as to why I’m leaving. I’ve been struggling to explain why. When
I say the weather, everyone just laughs. When I say San Francisco is too
loud, they start arguing. When I say it’s the people, they tell me to
find a better group of friends.

And the thing is, they’re right. It’s none of these. I’ve been
spectacularly unable to articulate it, but the real answer is simpler
and more prosaic. And now, after great thought and struggle, I realize
the answer is simply this: *Cambridge is the only place that’s ever felt
like home.* It’s that simple. And when you put it that way, it’s clear
why I have to go.

So goodbye Stanford, goodbye Palo Alto; goodbye south bay, goodbye
peninsula; goodbye Change Congress, goodbye Creative Commons; goodbye
Mission, goodbye SOMA; goodbye friends, goodbye loved ones; goodbye San
Francisco, home to everyone I’ve ever loved. You’ll always have my
heart.


Scenes
======

June 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scenes)

* * * * *

“God, I’m so sick of this stuff. Can’t we just go home?” she wines.
“Jesus,” I say, “would it kill you to go one more place?” It’s been a
long hot day in strange, busy New York City, and we’re not exactly at
our best. In fact, the combination of heat and exhaustion has turned our
love bitter, brought on the darkness and recriminations. Its at moments
like these, the dark depths of a relationship, that you wonder how
things could ever work. As we walk down the steps we hear a subway car
approach. We accelerate, running to catch it. Its doors open. We’re
moving faster now, pushing our way through the bustle of Manhattanites
to make it. The bell sounds and I jump inside and hear the doors whoosh
closed behind me. I spin around only to see her trapped on the other
side of the glass. I put my hand up to it, but the train accelerates and
she’s left standing there, just another face in the crowd.

* * * * *

“Hey, want to see the game? Want a ticket to the Giants game?” I do not,
in fact, want to see the game — this or any other game. I hate sports.
Yet the scalpers, apparently unaware of this, insist on trying to sell
me one. That’s what I get for walking near the ballpark, I guess. As I
curse my choice of scenery, a cop pulls up. He lowers his window and
leans out toward the scalper. The scalper hands him a ticket and the cop
speeds off. “But he didn’t pay!” a man in a suit walking by complains.
“Cops get a special deal,” explain the scalper. The man in the suit
laughs and marvels at the scene.

* * * * *

It’s weird being back at Stanford in the summer. Everything’s so empty,
nobody’s around. Well, not nobody — there seems to be some action near
the main quad. There are drum kits spread around and golf carts and
purple uniforms lying about. But most of all, there are people — a bunch
of students just standing around awkwardly. I’m about to ask one of them
what’s going on when a bell rings and a voice shouts “Background!”
Suddenly all the students snap to attention, begin walking in perfect
lines with bookbags slung over their shoulder, bicycles ridden in
perfect formation. These aren’t students at all, I realize with a lurch
— they’re extras. It’s disconcerting. A police guard is at the side,
keeping kids from running over the camera crew. I ask her what they’re
filming. “*Disney’s High School Musical*,” she says quickly, trying to
keep a student from cycling over the director’s cart.


Capital and its Complements: A Summary
======================================

June 30, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/comcap)

* * * * *

*The following is a non-technical summary of Brad DeLong’s May 2008
paper [Capital and Its
Complements](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/2008_pdf/20080521_capital.pdf).*

Adam Smith explained that in all countries with “security of property
and tolerable administration of justice” citizens would spend all their
money (capital), either on consumption or investment, causing the
country’s economy to grow. After some contention, later economic studies
tended to bare this out: a shortage of capital wasn’t always the
bottleneck, but when it was, removing it could lead to extraordinarily
rapid growth.

The problem for poor countries is that, because of high mortality rates
(which require more children to have some survive) and low educational
levels (which mean those children can find productive employment
quickly), they have high population growth and thus low capital-to-labor
ratios. Worse, trade allows you to spend your money buying manufactured
goods from overseas, for which you have only your very cheap labor to
provide in return. The result is that it requires an enormous amount of
domestic investment to improve capital-to-labor ratios.

And so rich country economists made “the neoliberal bet” on behalf of
poor countries: they hoped that loosening restrictions on international
capital flows would send capital rushing in to poor countries and build
their economies, the same way that Great Britain’s massive investment in
a young United States (in 1913 Britain’s foreign assets equaled 60% of
its domestic capital stock) built up that country.

But what ended up happening was exactly the opposite. Yes, NAFTA led US
companies to invest the \$20 to \$30 billion a year on manufacturing in
Mexico that its boosters predicted, but that investment was more than
outweighed by the \$30 to \$40 billion a year fleeing the country from
Mexico’s wealthy wanting to invest it in the United States. Why? In part
because the US was more politically stable, and thus a safer investment
climate. And in part because the US treats its own workers so poorly —
with productivity rising 35% since 2000 while real wages remain flat —
it provides an excellent investment opportunity.

But meanwhile, all this investment in the US was dwarfed by the Chinese
acquisition of our debt (and thus the political risk it represents).
China needed to do this, since US purchase of their exports is the only
thing funding the manufacturing-led industrialization of a massive
portion of their economy; there would be massive dislocation if that
funding dried up.

“Recognition of these facts came slowly.” First, Larry Summers said it
was our unsustainable current account deficit. (That was the 1990s;
today that deficit is four times as large.) Later, economists thought it
must have been our large budget deficits. Then they began thinking it
was the run-up in housing prices. But that, it is now clear to most
economists, was the result of a bubble. And yet the flow of capital to
the US continues. But, perhaps even more frighteningly, it could stop at
any moment.


The Percentage Fallacy
======================

July 21, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/percentagefallacy)

* * * * *

There’s one bit of irrationality that seems like it ought to be in
behavioral economics introduction but mysteriously isn’t. For lack of a
better term, let’s call it *the percentage fallacy*. The idea is simple:

> One day I find I need a blender. I see a particularly nice one at the
> store for \$40, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way home, I
> see the exact same blender on sale at a different store for \$20. Now
> I feel ripped off, so I drive back to the first store, return the
> blender, drive back to the second store, and buy it for \$20.
>
> The next day I find I need a laptop. I see a particularly nice one at
> the store for \$2500, so I purchase it and head home. But on the way
> home, I see the exact same laptop for \$2480. “Pff, well, it’s only
> \$20,” I say, and continue home with the original laptop.

I’m sure all of you have done something similar — maybe the issue wasn’t
having to return something, but spending more time looking for a cheaper
model, or fiddling with coupons and rebates, or buying something of
inferior quality. But the basic point is consistent: we’ll do things to
save 50% that we’d never do to save 1%.

At first this almost seems rational — of course we’re going to do more
to save more money! But you *aren’t* saving more money. With both the
blender and the laptop, you have the chance to save \$20. Either way,
you’re going to have another twenty in your pocket, which you can spend
on exactly the same things later on. Yet we behave differently depending
on whether we got that twenty by skimping on a small purchase or
skimping on a big one. Rationally, if driving back to the store isn’t
worth \$20 when you’re buying a laptop, it isn’t worth \$20 when you’re
buying a blender.

On the other hand, don’t those small savings tend to add up after a
while? If you start blowing \$20 every time you buy a trinket, you’re
soon going to be out of disposable income. Meanwhile, spending several
thousand dollars is much rarer, so isn’t it OK to slack off a bit on
such occasions?

If we work to save 50% on everything, big or small, that’s the
equivalent of saving 50% of our money altogether. Whereas if we only try
to save fixed amounts on every purchase, how much we save is dependent
on how many things we buy.

So which is the real irrationality? I’m not entirely sure of the answer.


The Predator State: A Summary
=============================

August 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/predatorstate)

* * * * *

James K. Galbraith’s *[The Predator
State](http://books.theinfo.org/go/141656683X)* is undoubtedly one of
the most important books on the economics of our era. Galbraith sets
himself the task, not only of exposing the discredited economic
orthodoxies of our generation, but also documenting the economy as it
really exists, and setting an agenda for the future. It is a book that
desperately needs to be listened to. And, even better than all that,
it’s a fun read. Go out and buy it immediately.

That said, here is a brief, abbreviated summary of the book, to better
pull out its themes and spread its message. It is of necessity less
clear and less well-argued than the book itself, which you should
actually read if you want to argue, but it should give the gist of
things.

**1:** The Reaganites swept into power on the arguments of economic
conservatives: lower taxes, tight money, and an assault on all opponents
of market forces (government, regulation, unions). Their views were
tried and failed completely. They have no remaining defenders in
academia and only slogans and cronies outside of it. There is no longer
any vision on the right; the left should leave its defensive crouch and
start proposing something new.

**2:** Friedman and friends said that markets would lead to democracy —
that “economic freedom” begets political freedom. But economic freedom
isn’t what it sounds like; it’s not freedom from economic want but
instead, as Friedman put it, “the freedom to choose” or, in other words,
“the freedom to shop”. But control over production is as unfree as in
the Soviet Union, with advertising for propaganda, R&D for planning, and
Wall Street analysts for government inspectors. “Lines form, under
capitalism, every day.”

**3:** Supply-siders argued that a) saving is a public good because it
leads to investment, b) America does not save enough compared to other
countries, c) saving would be unleashed by lowering taxes on it, d) the
resulting investment would spur an economic boom. Every piece of this is
wrong: a) in an efficient market, all the benefits from investment are
captured by the investor; thus investment cannot be a public good unless
markets are inefficient, in which case the government should step in
*more*, b) the correct amount of saving is a policy decision, there’s no
reason to believe other countries have it right (the Soviet Union had a
40% level of saving right up to its collapse), c) rich people save most
of their money anyway (it’s impossible to consume that much) and changes
in interest rates dwarf changes in tax rates; furthermore, real
investment is encouraged by *high* personal taxes, since this forces
people to keep their money in corporations, d) personal saving is less
than 1% of GDP; almost all investment comes from corporations or
overseas.

**4:** Milton Friedman claimed that high inflation (it was 10% in the
1970s) was just the result of printing too much money. Reagan’s Fed
adopted this belief, sending the US and many foreign countries into deep
recession. Eventually, the policy was completely abandoned and high
inflation has not been seen since. Serious inflation isn’t caused by
printing money, but by wage-price spirals — the price of oil shot up,
causing rising prices to cover oil costs, causing workers to demand
higher wages to pay those prices, causing prices to rise even higher,
and so on. Today, most prices are set by overseas manufacturers and
labor unions are so weak that workers can’t demand wage increases.
Inflation is dead.

**5:** Democrats (and some Republicans) repeatedly insist that we need
to balance the budget or face fiscal collapse. But the budget is ruled
by a simple equation: the total amount the government owes + the total
amount the public owes = the total amount we owe to foreign countries.
This is simple logic: whatever is not owed within the country must be
owed to another country. But the international economy depends on other
countries keeping large reserves of dollars (see 14), meaning our trade
deficit must be high. As long as this is so, we must either have the
government run large deficits or ask people to do so. The budget deficit
was closed in the late 1990s because citizens picked up the slack with
high credit card spending and home equity loans, inevitably leading to a
slump. Balancing the budget is for suckers; Democrats should spend the
money on public goods instead, promoting economic growth and thus
raising tax revenue.

**6:** The argument for free trade comes from Ricardo’s “comparative
advantage” — a clever textbook exercise, but irrelevant to the real
world since it assumes constant costs. In reality, either you produce
manufactured goods, in which your costs go down as you make more, or you
sell off commodities, in which case your costs go up as you make more.
With the former, it takes time for local industry to build up the
advantage (requiring protectionism). With the latter, you end up like
Mongolia, which opened up its animal husbandry market, swelling herd
sizes, turning grass into permanent desert, and killing off the entire
market. With no other exports, such a country is in big trouble. Ricardo
was wrong: diversification, not specialization, is the way to develop —
and how every successful country has. Unfortunately, we’ve forced this
broken system on most of the world. (China has escaped, letting
state-supported banks fund money-losing new companies until they grow
large enough to succeed as exporters. In the mean time, they dump their
products on local Chinese, allowing them to have a very high standard of
living at very low wages.)

**7:** There is no trade-off between equality and efficiency. Instead,
equality leads to efficiency. Denmark is one of the most equal countries
in Europe, and as a result one of the wealthiest. The rest are on a
continuum down to unequal and inefficient. Full employment and high
wages require companies to make the most of the employees they have,
increasing efficiency. Raising the minimum wage doesn’t raise
unemployment, it lowers it — unemployment and inequality have risen and
fallen together since 1920. Higher wages lead to more jobtaking and less
quitting. The remaining increase in inequality was caused by stock
market giveaways to dot-commers and Bush giveaways to government
contractors — which is why it was limited to Silicon Valley and the
Potomac, respectively.

**8:** The US is not a free market. Of GDP, 17% is health care (where
experts, not consumers decide how to spend), 16% is housing (subsidized
by quasi-public mortgage firms and tax deductions), 15% is federal
welfare, 14% is local welfare, 4.5% is military spending, 3% is higher
education (paid for mostly by government or conspicuous
philanthropy^[1](#fn:1)^ and consumed for status and not value).
Together, 70% of US GDP is planned; it’s just that our facade of a free
market makes us less efficient at planning than other countries
(especially in health care).

**9:** In the 1970s, American industry (particularly steel and cars) was
being challenged and weakened by Japan. Reagan’s assault on inflation
(see 4) dealt them a death blow, sending their foreign and domestic
markets into deep recession, driving up the value of the dollar (making
their exports more expensive than their competitors’), and raising
interest rates. In the 1980s the technical staff left for Silicon
Valley, and 1990s financial fraud killed off what remained. When new
startup founders paid themselves exorbitant salaries from VC money other
CEOs rushed to keep up, making them all wealthy enough to become a
separate class. They used their new power to prey on the corporations
that they ran.^[2](#fn:2)^

**10:** Previously, regulation kept the predators in check — unions,
NGOs, and progressive businesses pushed government standards to kill
regressive competitors. But newly-wealthy predator CEOs had the
Republicans take over and gut regulation. The result is the Predator
State, where every new law is a corporate giveaway. Prescription drug
benefits for Big Pharma; NCLB to defund and deskill schools (building
support for vouchers); and Social Security reform to give workers’
paychecks to Wall Street. (Democrats have so far prevented the latter,
but corporate-funded think tanks now aim to take them down from inside.)
The programs allow further predation; privatizing college loans has led
loan companies to bribe student loan officers. It’s not that Republican
government fails at tasks like stopping Katrina; it’s that such tasks of
governance are not its goal — opening up New Orleans for Halliburton
contracts is.

**11:** The great liberal economic agenda is “making markets work” —
small fixes for market failures. The canonical example is job training
to fight unemployment. But job training does not create new jobs,
economic growth does; the tech boom was the last time we saw a real
decrease in unemployment. Similarly, some Dems propose universal
preschool since experiments find kids with free preschool grow up to get
better-paying jobs. But those preschools did not create jobs, they just
gave their students an advantage in getting them. Universal preschool
would give everyone that advantage, leaving no net impact. And creating
markets in unmarketable goods (health care, energy, the climate) is
doomed to failure. In these industries markets will not work; planning
is required.

**12:** Planning is alleged to have been disproven by the Soviet Union’s
fall. But it is unavoidable. The market, even when it does work, fails
to take into account the wishes of the poor and the needs of the future,
since neither can buy things today. New Orleans fell not because of a
lack of foresight (it was predicted by the local paper) or technology
(the Army knew how to build strong levees) but because we lacked a
*plan* — nobody in power bothered to do anything about it. Similarly,
climate change will melt Antarctica and drown New York, Boston, South
Florida, Houston, the Bay Area, London, the Netherlands, Bangladesh, and
Shanghai. Stopping it requires a *plan*; an enormous one ranging from
elementary school classes to government-funded research centers to a
WWII-level restructuring of the economy.

**13:** Deregulation can have three effects: 1) increasing competition
and lowering wages and prices, 2) speeding technological change and
increasing quality, 3) creating monopolies and raising prices. Trucking
deregulation did 1, airline deregulation did 1 and 2, but telecom,
banking, and energy deregulation did 3. Charles Keating donated to the
government, leading VP George H. W. Bush’s task force to deregulate his
industry and allow the Savings and Loan Scandal. Ken Lay was Bush’s
largest contributor, leading VP Dick Cheney’s task force to deregulate
his industry and allow the Enron energy scandal.

The solution is to lower CEO pay, raise the minimum wage, and set wage
standards in between. Some liberals claim trade is the problem and the
solution is to set environmental and labor standards on other countries.
These are unenforceable and will be ineffective (companies moving
overseas already build clean factories since that’s most efficient and
no significant exports are made using child or prison labor). Instead,
we should set wage standards at home, like Scandinavia, forcing
companies to increase productivity and pay fair wages. Wage standards
should also apply to undocumented workers; illegal immigration is caused
by employers who send recruiters to Mexico for compliant and low-paid
workers. Applying wage standards to all will end these abusive
practices.

**14:** Any country that can pay for its imports entirely with exports
can organize its internal economy (its people and resources) however it
likes. Countries that do not balance their trade depend instead on
global capital markets and must play by their rules. But the US is a
special case: after World War II (1944) it set up the Bretton Woods
system of international exchange, pegging all currencies to the dollar
and backing the dollar with gold reserves. But during Vietnam’s deficits
(1971), Nixon broke the system, devaluing US currency and wreaking havoc
on the rest of the world. Reagan’s tight money policies (1981) caused so
much instability that other countries were forced to build up reserves
of US Treasury Bonds in exchange for military, economic, and export
security. US bubbles and the Soviet Union’s fall make this system less
secure than before, but as long as it remains the US can do whatever it
likes economically. And it might as well, since economic success will
strengthen the system and the policies proposed here will lead to
economic success.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/141656683X)
-   [Read chapter
    1](http://www.simonsays.com/content/book.cfm?pid=623524&tab=10&agid=2)

* * * * *

1.  Conspicuous philanthropy is like conspicuous consumption, a way for
    the rich to flaunt their wealth, only far more effective — you can
    outdo your neighbors simply by adding another zero to the check, the
    buildings with your name on them live on after you die, and the
    government gives you a tax deduction. [↩](#fnref:1)

2.  See the classic Thorstein Veblen, *Theory of the Leisure Class* for
    more on predation. [↩](#fnref:2)




How To Launch Software
======================

August 22, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/howtolaunch)

* * * * *

37signals recommends that software developers pursue what they call [the
Hollywood
Launch](http://gettingreal.37signals.com/ch13_Hollywood_Launch.php).
They don’t give any argument for this method, except perhaps the title
(as if Hollywood was a business you should try to imitate?) — I guess
the idea is that you’re supposed to do it since 37signals says to.

The basic idea behind the Hollywood Launch is simple: you release a few
hints about your product to build buzz, slowly revealing more and more
until the big day, when you throw open the doors and people flood your
site, sent there by all the blog coverage and email alerts.

This may work well for Hollywood — if your movie is a big hit at the
box-office on opening weekend, then the movie theaters are more likely
to keep showing it in the weeks to come and you get credit for being
“one of the weekend’s biggest films”. But for software developers, it’s
moronic. Your software isn’t being released in theaters, it’s available
over the Web. You don’t have to worry about the theater no longer
showing after week one; you can keep pushing it for years, growing your
userbase.

Instead what happens when software developers try the Hollywood Launch,
and I’ve seen this many times, is that users indeed do flood to your
site on launch day but…

1.  They bring the site down from the load. You scramble to get it back
    up and succeed by coding like a mad man, only to find…

2.  They discover some big bug that you never quite noticed before,
    which makes the whole thing look like embarrassing hackwork. (*What?
    You forgot to test that last-minute JavaScript change in IE6 1/2?*)
    So you’re desperately rushing to fix the bug before the traffic dies
    down, rush-patching things and restarting the server when…

3.  You bring the site down for everyone because there was a syntax
    error in your patch that keeps the server from coming back up. You
    fix it while cursing yourself madly. Finally everything seems to
    work. You take a breath and decide to see what people are saying
    about you on the Web, only to discover…

4.  Everyone misunderstood what your product does because your front
    page wasn’t clear enough. Now they all think it’s stupid and wonder
    aloud how you even know how to breathe. So you reply in all the
    comment threads and fix your front page to ensure no one could
    possibly misunderstand what it is you’re doing just in time to find…

5.  All the traffic is gone.

Tomorrow, hardly any of those users come back. Your traffic graphs look
like the sharpest mountain you’ve ever seen: a huge climb up and then,
almost immediately, a similarly-sized crash back down.

So what do you do then? Well, you do what you should have done all
along: you grow the site.

I’ll call this technique the Gmail Launch, since it’s based on what
Gmail did. Gmail is probably one of the biggest Web 2.0 success stories,
so there’s an argument in its favor right there. Here’s how it works:

1.  Have users from day one. Obviously at the very beginning it’ll just
    be yourself and your co-workers, but as soon as you have something
    that you don’t cringe while using, you give it to your friends and
    family. Keep improving it based on their feedback and once you have
    something that’s tolerable, let them invite their friends to use it
    too.

2.  Try to get lots of feedback from these new invitees, figuring out
    what doesn’t make sense, what needs to be fixed, and what things
    don’t work on their bizarre use case combination. Once these are all
    straightened out, and they’re using it happily, you let them invite
    their friends. Repeat until things get big enough that you need to…

3.  Automate the process, giving everyone some invite codes to share. By
    requiring codes, you protect against a premature slashdotting and
    force your users to think carefully about who actually would want to
    use it (getting them to do your marketing for you). Plus, you make
    everyone feel special for using your product. (You can also start
    (slowly!) sending invite codes to any email lists you might have.)

4.  Iterate: give out invite codes, fix bugs, make sure things are
    stable. Stay in this phase until the number of users you’re willing
    to invite is about the same as the number you expect will initially
    sign up if you make the site public. For Gmail, this was a long
    time, since a lot of people wanted invites. You can probably safely
    do it sooner.

5.  Take off the invite code requirement, so that people can use the
    product just by visiting its front page. Soon enough, random people
    will come across it from Google or various blogs and become real
    users.

6.  If all this works — if random people are actually happy with your
    product and you’re ready to grow even larger — *then* you can start
    building buzz and getting press and blog attention. The best way to
    do this is to have some kind of news hook — some gimmick or
    controversial thing that everyone will want to talk about. (With
    reddit, the big thing was that we switched from Lisp to Python,
    which was discussed endlessly in the Lisp and Python communities and
    gave us our first big userbase.)

7.  Start marketing. Once you start using up all the growth you can get
    by word-of-mouth (and this can take a while — Google is only getting
    to this stage *now*), you can start doing advertising and other
    marketing-type things to provide the next big boost in growth.

The result will be a graph that just keeps accelerating and climbing up.
That’s the graph that everyone loves to see: solid growth, not a one-day
wonder. Good luck.

* * * * *

Since 37signals quotes from people who followed their advice, I thought
I might as well do the same.
[mojombo](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=284057):

> I find this to be excellent advice. This is exactly the approach we
> took at GitHub almost down to the letter. It took about 2 months until
> the site was good enough to use to host the GitHub source, another
> month until we started private beta with invites, and three more
> months until public launch.
>
> Artificial scarcity is a great technique to generate excitement for a
> product while also limiting growth to a rate that won’t melt your
> servers. We worked through a huge number of problems and early users
> gave us some of the ideas that have defined GitHub. By doing a
> Hollywood launch, things would have been very different and I am
> convinced, very much worse.
>
> Do not, I repeat, DO NOT underestimate how much your users will help
> you to define your product. If you launch without having significant
> user feedback time, you’ve essentially thrown away a massive (and
> free) focus group study.
>
> Let me also say that when we finally did our public launch, there was
> plenty of buzz, and all of it was the RIGHT kind of buzz. The buzz
> that attracts real, lasting customers (and no, we weren’t on
> TechCrunch, that traffic is garbage).


Everyday Utilitarianism: Who Gets the TV First?
===============================================

August 24, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/everydayutil)

* * * * *

I’ve often thought it would be fun to write a book on “everyday
utilitarianism” — how to apply mathematical formalizations of
utilitarianism and game theory to help you solve everday life dilemmas,
like who should get to use the television first or whether you should go
out with that guy.

The basic idea would be that each chapter would revolve around a
particular mathematical principle and demonstrate it using a concrete
example from everyday life. Since I’ll probably never get around to
writing such a book, I figured I’d just write up such examples on my
blog when I encountered them and maybe someone else would take the idea
and run with it.

So here’s the first example:

It’s 8pm, and you settle down in front of the television to watch
*American Idol*. Unfortunately, at the very same time your roommate is
also settling down in front of the television to play one of his video
games. Quickly, the two of you get into a tiff about who will get to use
the television first. You both would prefer using the television first
rather than second, yet, since *American Idol* is a live show, watching
it now is a rather different experience from watching it later, while
the video game will remain the same all night. How can you prove
mathematically to your roommate that you should get to use the
television first?

Let U(TV\_0 = A), which we’ll write AT0, represent the number of
*utiles* (essentially, a measure of enjoyment) you get from watching the
TV first, while BT0 represents the number of utiles your roommate gets
from watching the TV first. (AT1 and BT1 represent the utiles from
watching it second.) Obviously our goal is to maximize the total number
of utiles (i.e. enjoyment) in the world, by picking the solution that
leads to our greatest number.

First we write down what we know. Obviously you both would prefer to
watch the show first, rather than second:

AT0 \> AT1\
 BT0 \> BT1

But since *Amereican Idol* is live, we can also say that the benefit you
get from watching it first is bigger than the benefit your roommate gets
from playing his game first. In other words:

AT0 - AT1 \> BT0 - BT1

Finally, we want to find out which is bigger: you going first and him
second, or you going second and him first. Let \>\< represent “which is
bigger?”

AT0 + BT1 \>\< AT1 + BT0

Now, to solve, we take what we know:

AT0 - AT1 \> BT0 - BT1

And we add AT1 to both sides:

AT0 \> BT0 - BT1 + AT1

And then add BT1 to both sides:

AT0 + BT1 \> BT0 + AT1

Which precisely answers are question above: it’s better for you to go
first.

By this time in the proof, however, your roommate should have wandered
off, leaving you to watch *American Idol* in peace. Unfortunately, not
having seen your proof, he thinks you’re just a selfish ass as opposed
to trying hard to do what’s best for the whole world.


My Life With Tim
================

August 25, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mylifewithtim)

* * * * *

*I wrote this years ago (probably the summer after college), filled with
nostalgia, in a small notebook on a plane to or from Boston. (I finally
understand how people can write books long-form!) I meant to type it in
as soon as I got back and post it here, but I lost it and never got the
chance. While moving recently it turned up again and I thought I should
seize the opportunity to type it in while I still had my hands on it.
(Also, coincidentally, I had lunch today with Tim.)*

*Apologies for the poor writing; I’ve improved a bit in the subsequent
years and it’s rather hard to write well when you’re pouring your
memories into a notebook on a plane.*

In 7th grade we were asked to do a project on the Great Men Who Made
America, or something like that. Other kids chose civil rights leaders
and politicians and even scientists. Then a big tech geek, I chose my
hero, Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.

One of the first assignments was to do some research and answer a list
of questions provided by the instructor (one of them being “what did
your contemporaries think of you?” — I still wince at not then knowing
what “contemporaries” meant). I was able to answer most of them off the
top of my head and most of the rest from TimBL (as he was universally
called by all but Dave Winer)’s web page. But a few, like “Do you have
any regrets?” were not really answerable form such material. So, with
some trepidation, I sent him an email. His website said not to email him
about school projects on the Web, but I convined myself that school
projects on *him* didn’t qualify. So I carefully composed my email and
sent it out, hoping for the best.

A few days later I received a rather short-tempered reply. “Regrets?” he
said. “I have a few. But then again, too few to mention.” (I didn’t get
the reference until years later when I heard the words again over the
radio — I thought he was just being poetic.) But my favorite answer was
his response to one of the theme questions I asked: “How do you think
your work has shaped America?” or something like that. (I was taking the
assignment a little too literally, I guess.) He shot back with a phrase
that’s stuck with me ever since: “I was an Englishman living in France
and working in Switzerland — it’s got nothing to do with America.” I
proudly reported this back to my teacher, complaining about his
assignment’s Amerocentrism.

The next time I check Tim’s web page, it said not to email him
concerning school projects on the Web or on Tim Berners-Lee.

* * * * *

I didn’t really run into TimBL again until a few years later when I was
visiting Cambridge, Mass., where he worked at MIT. I was working on RSS
at the time with W3C employee Dan Brickly and I felt cocky enough to try
to go see TimBL’s office. I got as far as the nameplate outside his door
when a gruff man with a beard stopped me. “What are you doing?” he
asked. “Seeing Dan Brickley,” I lied. “That’s not Dan’s office,” he
said. “Go wait in the hall. I’ll get Dan,” said the man.

The man, I later learned, was Ralph R. Swick (or RRS), and it always
struck me that he hated me, or at least looked down on me because of my
age. In this encounter he at least could claim to not know who I was,
but even later he would ignore me, ignore what I said, or in one
particular instance, make fun of me. (I’ll get to that later.)

Dan, on the other hand, was glad to see me and took me on a tour of the
W3C, where he and TimBL worked. “Is Tim around?” I asked casully. “Oh
no,” he said, “he’s off in [foreign country].” “Oh,” I said. “But I can
take you to meet our PR director and she can answer any questions you
might have.”

This seemed like an odd move to me. At the time, at least, I was a
co-worker, not a journalist. Still, why not. She gave me the standard
spiel about the W3C, which of course I’d already knew. (Although there
was one funny moment: “The Web is just 10 years old,” she said,
obviously repeating a standard line. “Were you everything you are at 10
years old?” There was an awkward pause as she tried to calculate my age
and realized I might be.)

Eager to show her I knew what I was talking about, I decided to make an
informed criticism of the W3C. Maybe I challenged is corporate control,
or the bylaws’ undemocratic requirements that the Director (TimBL)
approve everything, or maybe that and more. She gave me standard
responses, but I kept pushing and she got increasingly agitated and
eventually started shouting. I wasn’t hurt, and pressed on, but against
my will I started crying (although I imagine it may have looked
intentional — a cheap arguing tactic, perhaps). She offered me tissues
and toned down, asking me to send her some concrete suggestions by email
to consider.

As DanBri took me out, he tried to console me. “Don’t worry,” he said,
“she scares everyone. That’s what makes her so good.” For whatever
reason, she always seemed extra-nice to me after that.

* * * * *

I next ran into TimBL at a W3C conference in Cambridge, where they were
having a meeting on RDF, which I was beginning to get interested in. The
meeting involved a series of presentations on various topics and through
it all, TimBL struck me as incredibly brilliant. He would type away at
his laptop the whole presentation, apparently lost in some project and
not paying attention to anything. Then, towards the end, he would
quickly raise his hand and ask the one question that revealed all the
flaws of the presenter’s assumptions, cutting through everything they
said.

![Me and Tim Berners-Lee](image1_mylifewithtim)

At the end of the meeting, DanBri insisted I meet TimBL and so I went
over to shake his hand. TimBL moved and talked so fast he appeared
almost as a blur, bursting with energy and bouncing around the room.
DanBri took my camera and TimBl slowed down for a moement to grab me
around the shoulder and pose for a picture, a photo which I later used
frequently. (God, I looked so young!)

I met a bunch of other cool people at the meeting — B.K. DeLong, who
introduced me to Tantek (then at Microsoft, he looked for all the world
like a Borg; he later joined Technorati and hounded me incessantly to
take a summer internship there (I was at dinner with him the other nigh
and apparently he still thinks I should!))), libby, and the elusive
mnot. But the one I remember most was Dan Connolly, or DanC as he was
called.

At first, for some reason, I thought he was a kid. He wore a simple
t-shirt and pulled out his guitar during breaks. His enthusiasm was even
greater than TimBL’s and he was clearly just as sharp, although in some
ways more so, since he had a programmer’s logicalness that he applied to
every aspect of his life.

He worked from home in Kansas City, where he lived with his wife and
kids. TO balance work and family, he worked out a contract with his
life, which meant that at 5:00 he would stop whatever he was doing, no
matter how important, for Family Time.

I would follow him around on the RDF chatrooms and could feel myself
growing more logical just by listening to him. When I could I would sort
of apprentice under him, following along and helping as he wrote
programs to do various tasks. I even considered going out to visit him
in Kansas City at one point.

He was an enormous influence, despite his socially conservative politics
(which I always attributed to his location). He was usually quiet about
them, but once he posted a petition in favor of parental abortion
notification laws. At the time I was a radical on children’s rights at
least, and thought parents shouldn’t be notified about anything. He also
mentioned he was trying to figure out why his school *wasn’t* teaching
Intelligent Design (then a new phrase to me), absurdly suggesting he had
to follow the money. It turns out following the money is much better at
finding why people *do* teach Intelligent Design.

Still, I suppose everyone has flaws, and these were relatively minor.
It’s clear why TimBL chose DanC to be his right-hand man, handling the
details for anything important.

* * * * *

The next time I met TimBL was at the WWW2002 conference in Hawaii. DanC
invited me to wake up early for a “Semantic Web Swim” with him and TimBL
but, ashamed of my body at the time, I stupidly declined — a move I
still regret.

One night DanC, some other people, and I went out to a place on the
beach. I, I have to say, didn’t have a sip of alcohol — I still haven’t,
actually — but everyone else got hammered. (I was worried some of them
might walk into the ocean by accident and get swept away.) I left my
participation ambiguous, however, when I posted a short note in an
obscure place on my blog, but John Robb, then-CEO of UserLand Software
(Dave Winer, founder) found it and quoted me on his blog with the
comment “Aaron is 14. Someone should tell his parents.” (No one ever
did, as far as I know.) The next day, when I went to see UserLand
employee Robert Scoble give a talk, I accidentally let my badge in the
hotel room and was dragged out of the talk by security.

On Semantic Web Developer Day, I gave a short presentation about a
project I was working on. Ralph Swick (the gruff fellow, you’ll recall)
also gave a presentation. I got in line to ask him a question, but I was
last and we were out of time. “It’ll be quick,” I lied. “OK, they said.
“Have you thought at all about the privacy implications of this?” I
asked (for his software was a total privacy nightmare). “Yes,” RRS
responded and everybody laughed. I went back t the audience feeling like
a jerk and RRS ignored me when I tried to ask him to elaborate
one-on-one.

It was in the hallway one day that I first really talked to TimBL. He
was breezing down the corridor when he spotted me and ran up. “Aaron!”
he said. “I really appreciate all the work you[‘re doing — it’s great
stuff. Do you think maybe you could help with a little project?]”
Flustered, I said of course. He outlined a project having to do with
encrypted RDF and I eagerly volunteered, amazed at my good fortune.

A few days later, at a conference dinner, I got my food and was looking
for a place to sit, when TimBL came by. “Here,” he said, “I think I’ve
got a place for you” and he brought me over to the W3C table, seating me
directly across from him, which was simply amazing. The table was full
of good cheer and Tim commemorated the moment by passing his camera
around it and asking everyone to take a photo from their point of view.

I last saw him as we were leaving when he pulled my mom aside and
introduced himself. “Aaron’s doing great work,” he said, “but I’m a
little worried. The other night at dinner all he had was rice.” “Oh,
he’s just a fussy eater,” my mom explained.

* * * * *

The last time my path crossed with TimBL is when I was applying for
Stanford. My Dad happened to be in Cambridge at the time and insisted on
asking TimBL for a letter of recommendation, by going over to TimBL’s
office. Apparently he had better luck than I, since I’m told TimBL
agreed and I was later accepted to Stanford. I guess a letter of
recommendation from the creator of the Web counts for something, even if
he is an Englishman.

[image1_mylifewithtim]: image1_mylifewithtim.jpg

A Theory of Change
==================

September 10, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toc)

* * * * *

People want to make the world a better place. But how? Barack Obama says
I can change the direction of the country by voting for him. Al Gore
says I can solve the climate crisis with a letter to the editor. MoveOn
says I can stop George W. Bush by signing their petition. Perhaps, but
these requests ring hollow. How is writing a letter to my local paper
going to stop the polar ice caps from melting?

Most groups have a couple steps at the end (switch to alternative
energy, stopping carbon from being emitted, preventing global warming)
and a couple steps at the beginning (write your congressman and send a
letter to the paper) but in between they seem to expect that some kind
of miracle will happen. They’re missing the concrete steps in between,
the actual way we get from here to there.

In the nonprofit world, such a plan is called a Theory of Change. And
the reason they’re so rare is because they’re dreadfully hard to come
by. The world has no shortage of big problems, but it’s hard to think of
ways we might realistically solve them. Instead, the same few things —
vote, preach, march — get trotted out again and again.

For over a year now, I’ve been looking for theories of change for
politics. And I’ve found a few that I think just might work. But I can’t
pull them off by myself. So here they are, in case someone out there
wants to help.

The Netroots Congress
---------------------

Here’s how you get elected to Congress today: First, you make friends
with a bunch of wealthy people, being sure to agree with them on all the
important issues. Then you take their money and hire a well-connected
Washington, D.C. campaign manager. The campaign manager shows you how to
ask for more money and then gives it to his partner, who makes some TV
and radio ads and runs them in your district. They keep doing this until
your money runs out and then, if you’re lucky, you get more votes than
the other guy.

Because of the netroots, it’s now possible to change the first part of
this story. Instead of raising your money from conservative or centrist
rich people, you can now raise money from progressive people over the
Internet. So instead of candidates who all agree that telephone
companies shouldn’t be punished for spying on Americans, you can have
candidates who think every American should have free health care.

Concretely, you’d ask people who want to do this to sign up to pay \$X a
month. Then you’d go around looking for candidates (or potential
candidates) who genuinely believe in progressive principles. When you
find them, you give them the money, and now they actually have a chance
of getting elected.

Bonus: Get more money by fiercely promoting how bad the incumbent is or
how good the challenger is.

This sort of thing has been done haphazardly and achieved some real
successes. Donna Edwards, for example, is now a member of Congress. The
idea here is to institutionalize it.

The Plain-Speaking Party
------------------------

The last plan changes the first part of the election process I
mentioned. But you could also try changing the rest of it. Right now, if
you want to run as a Democrat, your biggest source of funding will be
the Democratic Party, especially the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee (DCCC). To get their money, the DCCC
[requires](http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2005/0501.sullivan.html)
you hire one of their friends. Their friends are all corrupt hacks who
run the same failed campaigns again and again.

This is normally thought to be unavoidable because you can’t win without
money and you can’t get money without the DCCC. What this misses is that
you don’t need as much money if you’re running a radically innovative
campaign.

Instead of raising money to run ads, do a PR stunt that will get lots of
free media and word-of-mouth attention. Center your campaign around a
clear proposal that most of the public will support but no other
politician would dare touch. Be forceful and refuse to back down in the
face of attacks from the press or your opponent. And, above all, always
make it clear to people that you’re an average person, not an average
politician. No boring speeches, no political buzzwords, no meaningless
cliches.

It’s never been seriously tried outside of the movies, but I expect that
the effect would be electrifying. The media would cover your every
entertaining move and money would flow in from around the Internet. The
60% that doesn’t vote in midterms would start to reconsider. Hell, Ron
Paul attempted half this strategy while being completely nuts and he
still received enough money and volunteers to win five House seats.

If you can actually win an election this way, you’ll be able to get
dozens more to follow your lead the next time around. Pretty soon, it’ll
be a movement.

Slate Cards
-----------

It’s not just about the President and it’s not just about Congress.
(It’s also not just about the US, but that’s what we’re focusing on
today.) Local elections also have an impact, if only the people who win
them often go on to even bigger positions. (Who in Wassila, Alaska
thought they might be picking a future president?)

Most local races don’t get a lot of attention and most people don’t do
much research on them. Which makes them much easier to influence that
bigger races. Imagine a site where you gave it your email address and
zip code and every time there was a local election, it’d send you the
progressive candidates to vote for. You could print it out and take it
to the polls and feel much better about your pick for “register of
probate”.

In San Francisco, the local papers issue endorsements on all the races
and each of the candidates they endorse chip in some money to send a
postcard with the whole endorsement list to every voter. This group
could do the same thing. It could also ask folks to chip in a couple
bucks to help pay for mailing post cards to their neighbors. (Or they
could print some out at home.)

Shareholder Democracy
---------------------

Supposedly, corporations aren’t actually controlled by their CEOs. The
CEOs are instead hired by the shareholders, to run the business that the
shareholders actually own. A lot of these shares are held by people who
aren’t big fans of business as usual. If they got together they could
use their shares to vote for reform.

Now voting on shares is complicated enough that most people don’t
bother, but increasingly votes are being moved onto the Internet. It’s
possible for an aspiring organization to build some software that could
automatically vote for people if they wanted. So you could imagine, for
example, a couple million MoveOn members letting a new progressive group
vote their shares for them, allowing progressives to apply some real
pressure to misbehaving corporations.

Combined with legal changes that are being considered that would further
make corporate voting more fair, this is something that could make a
real impact.

Seriously Interesting Journalism
--------------------------------

[I’ve written about this
before.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/deadnews) The basic idea is
simple: There’s lots of fascinating stuff going on in the world. And
yet, to become news, all the background and color is drained out of it.
Worse, to be on TV, a story has to be so dumbed down that you feel
stupid for watching it. And to be in the paper, a story has to have so
little background that only an expert could understand it. A news show
that covered interesting stories in a way that made them genuinely
interesting would be quite popular and could have a tremendous impact.

More?
-----

I’ll try to remember to update this page as I learn more. Post your own
ideas in the comments. (Remember: “Require all politicians to wear a lie
detector” is not a theory of change — we’re looking for ways to get
there.)


A Saipan Story
==============

September 14, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/saipan)

* * * * *

*The following is fiction. Violent, explicit fiction. However, while the
characters are fictional, the setting is entirely real.*

Jason wakes up in an elegant DC apartment, sunlight streaming in through
the picture windows and making the white walls gleam. He brushes his
teeth and showers, before putting on his customary white-collared shirt.
Only today he isn’t going to the office. Instead, a hired car waits
outside to take him to the airport, where he’ll be travelling (first
class, of course) to Saipan, that grand “laboratory of liberty” he’s
known so much about, and on which he is due to write an article for some
conservative magazine or other (his employers will place it).

He begins the piece in the car: a small island off the coast of Japan,
Saipan was made an American protectorate after World War II. Only its
unique agreement allows it to ignore many US laws, making it as close to
a free-market paradise as could be imagined: a guest-worker program, low
taxes, and no meddlesome industry regulation. A tropical paradise
indeed. The thrill of the idea sustains him through the day’s journey.

Meeting him at the airport is Jack Abramoff, the conservative hero who
set up this Saipan tour program, and a bunch of other, mostly older,
faces he vaguely recognizes from around the capitol. Abramoff runs such
tours regularly, helping spread the word among his tribe of this
all-too-little known conservative success story.

* * * * *

Triana awoke in a Philippines shantytown, ramshackle huts spread amongst
open-air markets. She had heard whispers of a better life out there and
when, one day, a man offered to take her to America, she eagerly
accepted. She was crammed in with a boatload of others for a packed
journey to the far-off land. But soon enough they arrived and her hosts
showed them all to their barracks, accommodations they’d obligingly
provided.

As they were taken to their quarters, she breathed in deep the tropical
air. “Ahh, the smell of America,” she exclaimed. She heard a laugh from
someone behind her. “America?” he chuckled. “Welcome to Saipan.”

* * * * *

Jason steps off the plane into a tropical paradise, full of verdant palm
trees, golden beaches, and a dazzling sunset. Abramoff shows them to
their elegant hotel ([complete with private
beach](http://saipan.regency.hyatt.com/hyatt/hotels/gallery/photos.jsp?hotelId=83&start=1))
and invites them to meet him back in the lobby for the official tour the
next morning. Jason changes into his bathing suit and goes for a quick
swim, before tucking himself into his lusciously-outfitted bed.

The next morning, Abramoff begins the tour with eighteen holes of golf,
carved into a cliff overseen by the mountains and overlooking a fabulous
bay. As they play, Abramoff catches up on their stories and dazzles them
with tales of Saipan’s splendor.

That night he provides a special treat — he takes them to the red-light
district, where incredibly-thin bikin-wearing girls cast mournful,
searching looks at the well-suited group of tourists. Jason smiles, but
he is almost taken aback by the hungry gleam in some of the older
businessmen’s eyes. One rotund White House official grabs two girls, one
on each arm, and drags them over to a pay-by-the-hour hotel. The others
all go off looking for their fancy. “What about you Abramoff?” Jason
asks. “Oh, I’ve already got a girlfriend here,” he winks. “Guess I’ll
see you guys tomorrow,” he adds before heading off.

Jason shrugs his shoulders and heads toward a slender girl, apparently
in her teens, with a kind smile on his face. The girl smiles widely
back.

* * * * *

They were fenced in, Triana and the others, allowed only to shuffle
between the barracks and the windowless, exit-barred factory. If they
disobeyed, they would be deported immediately, all their possessions
confiscated. If they attempted to escape, the police would chase them
down and beat them. From then on, their life was to sew khakis for
Californians, complete with the “Made in the USA” labels that give their
future owners such comfort.

There were few comforts for Triana. Bathrooms whose access was strictly
controlled and whose condition was so filthy that one was inclined to
avoid them altogether. Rations so tough one had to saw through them with
the plastic knife. And, of course, the constant, seething hum of sewing
machines in the semi-darkness.

Each night, when they headed back to their barracks after their shift,
they were accosted by men, leaning against their cars and flashing
dollar bills. “Come on, just a little something?” one might call. “Let
me show you a good time,” another might add. The factory does not pay
cash, so the only way for Triana to make some money is to crawl under
their steering wheels and extend her tongue.

* * * * *

The next day, Abramoff takes to meet the local pwoer-players. Factory
owners gush about the island’s incredible economic growth, and
politicians (many of whom got their start as humble factory owners),
warn them about the Federal Government’s imperialist (and racist)
interference with their local way of life. “They want to shut us down,”
one insists. “The leftists can’t stand to have us proving that the free
market works!” Even the island’s Democrats have seen the light, signing
on to plans for school vouchers, low taxes, and right-to-work laws.

They close off the day with a tour of a model factory. It is a clean and
well-lit place, and the employees he introduces them to all gush with
thanks for their newfound prosperity in life. Afterwards, Abramoff takes
them deeper into the complex and invites them to take a factory girl
home for the night.

Jason is struck by one girl with dazzling eyes and is immediately
smitten. “Jason,” he says, extending his hand. “Triana,” she replies.
She speaks little English, but Jason is satisfied to spend the whole
trip back simply staring into her eyes.

Back in his hotel room, he eagerly tears off her clothes and begins
caressing her naked body, slowly removing his garments as well. He flips
her over and lifts her up onto all fours, slipping on a condom before
sliding into her from behind. Triana moans with his thrusts and he
thinks about the power he has here, able to instantly have any girl he
desires. His thrusts grow harder and soon he is knocking her skull into
the bed’s headboard, which only makes him pump harder still. (Outside, a
cleaning maid shakes her head at the noise.) Harder and harder he goes
until, with a sickening crack, he comes, and collapses onto her back
with a thud.

He breathes in deep, but there’s a strange smell. He opens his eyes to
find a line of blood running thru Triana’s hair and down onto the blood.
“Shit!” he exclaims, and pulls out, his erection fading. He spins the
girl over and shakes her violently, but her body feels strangely limp.
He feels her pulse and she is gone. “Shit!” he says again, only quieter
this time.

He is breathing heavily; he needs to focus, needs to think of a plan. He
looks around the room. A window! He wraps he girl up in the sheets, and
hoists her over to it and tosses her out, making a quiet thud on the
ground below. Turning back to the bed, he notices more sheets stained
with blood. He tears them up and tosses them out too, covering the body.
Luckily, however, the bed is so lusciously appointed that nothing has
gotten through to the mattress and very little is on the headboard. He
wipes it clean, showers the blood off himself, and takes a deep breath
before heading for the front desk.

“I’d like to rent a car,” he tells the concierge. “Of course, sir,” he
replies. Soon he is loading the bundle of limbs and sheets into the
trunk of an SUV and heading off down the coast. He finds a boat rental
spot and manages to smuggle the body on board the craft. He ties on some
ballast for good measure and then takes it all some ways out into the
ocean, before pitching it overboard.

Back in his hotel room (his bed having been quickly remade), he stares
at his hands. He has murdered, he has taken a human life. And yet, he
has gotten away with it. The women here so eagerly give themselves up to
be used here, used and discarded, discarded like just another market
good. And nobody cares if they are gone — nobody cares about them at
all. What power, to be able to control human life like that. What power,
to be that kind of man.

That night, the sex is incredible.

* * * * *

Unfortunately, his island carouse is fast coming to an end. The next day
Abramoff takes them back to the airport and quickly he finds himself
back in his DC apartment, showering and putting on his white-collared
shirt, before heading into the office. He finishes off his story on
Saipan (“Maybe we on the mainland can learn something about freedom from
our far-flung island commonwealth,” he
[writes](http://www.heartland.org/policybot/results.html?artId=940).
“Imagine: an island paradise where newcomers are welcomed and enterprise
flourishes.”) and sends it to his bosses. But even with the job
finished, he can’t shake the island from his mind.

His life of white apartments and gray offices seems stale now, he longs
for a little excitement in his life. He heads to a Adams Morgan bar, but
the girls here are all involved in their own scenarios, with none of the
come-hither looks of those on the island. He nurses a beer at the bar,
trying to put the longing out of his mind. An attractive girl comes to
the bar, ordering drinks for her friends. As she scoops up the drinks
and heads back, Jason calls out at her: “Hey there, can I get you
anything?” She turns around and stares at him, before turning back and
walking away.

He has to get back to Saipan.


Obama’s Next Move
=================

September 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nextobama)

* * * * *

I’ve been hesitant to talk about political strategy this season. Partly
because it’s so cliched (everyone’s doing it), partly because it’s so
ephemeral, partly because it’s just boring. But I think the situation
Obama’s found himself in has larger resonances and coming up with a
solution to it is genuinely difficult.

For those who haven’t been following things, the story is this. There
are two candidates: Barack Obama, a young centrist Democrat who bills
himself as the post-partisan candidate of “change” (i.e. not Bush), and
John McCain, a fairly non-ideological 72-year-old Republican who has
decided to give up on his centrist inclinations and run far to the
right. For the first half of the campaign, Obama’s message has been that
he’s change while McCain is more of the same (visual: McCain hugging
Bush). McCain has argued that he’s got experience and courage while
Obama is not ready to lead.

This was exactly the campaign Obama had planned on and their strategy
was working perfectly; McCain was behind just about the whole time. So
McCain decided to shake things up and picked Sarah Palin, an unknown,
far-right woman to be VP and began campaigning on them being “the
original mavericks”. (McCain’s lack of ideology led the press to call
him a maverick for signing onto some liberal bills; Palin won her seat
through a primary challenge against corrupt Alaska Republicans.) Palin
is wildly inexperienced (and so is being kept from the press) and most
of her claims to be anti-corruption are complete lies, but the press has
been half-hearted in pointing this out.

So that’s the recap. Now the problem. Whenever they’re stuck,
conservatives have two traditional responses: swift-boating and
projection. Swift-boating is taking your opponent’s main asset and
making it a liability. The classic example is taking John Kerry’s
venerated war service and arguing that it was a fraud. But it can be
used more generally as well. So when someone says “We need to increase
welfare to help the poor,” the conservatives reply “Welfare doesn’t help
the poor — it just encourages them to be lazier.” Projection is take
your opponent’s main asset and claiming it to be your own. The classic
example here is that when the media is doing an effective job of
parroting your story, you get out in front and complain that it spends
its time parroting your *opponent’s* story. The projection response to
welfare is “No, we’re the ones who really want to help the poor — that’s
why we’re proposing an ownership society.”

It’s tough to swift-boat Obama on the issue of change. He’s young, he’s
black, he’s a Democrat. Calling him more of the same just seems
laughable. But, because of McCain’s history, saying that McCain is also
for change has more resonance.

So what does Obama do? Whichever direction he goes, McCain will just
follow him there. If Obama says he’s for *real* change, McCain will just
say he’s for real change too. To voters, it’ll seem like a toss-up.
Worse, a lot of Obama’s electoral strategy hinges on his massive
on-the-ground team of volunteers bringing out new voters. If he goes
negative (the obvious response), he’ll take the campaign down into a
mud-slinging match and turn all those new voters off. The only way to
win is to go someplace McCain can’t. And the one place McCain can’t go
is the issues. (Gasp! We might actually have to talk about issues.)

McCain’s plans have been the most nutzoid right-wing proposals: end
employer-paid health care, permanent bases in Iraq, tax cuts for the
rich, and head-in-the-sand about energy. They’re big juicy targets. But
so far, Obama has been incompetent about going after them. Whenever his
ads begin talking about issues, they suddenly switch into policy-wonk
mode and begin using so many long words that even I don’t understand
what he’s going on about. And when they criticize John McCain they just
seem like they’re making stuff up. To win, Obama’s ads will have to make
the issues sexy — he’ll have to find a way to make talking about policy
entertaining.

Crazy as that sounds, it isn’t impossible. There’s real substance to
these policy disagreements — they’re genuinely interesting. John McCain,
for example, thinks the big problem with health care in America is that
people have too much of it. Employers buy health care in bulk for all
their workers, whether they need it or not. Instead, he thinks each
American should pay for health care on their own. That’s crazy, but it’s
substantive crazy.

Instead of taking the campaign further into the mud, Obama will seem as
if he’s raising it back up to talk about the issues. Hell, the media
might even feel the pressure and start talking about issues themselves.
It’s too late in the game for McCain to rewrite all his policy
proposals, so he’ll either have to try to defend them (a complete losing
battle) or he’ll have to keep slinging mud at someone who is trying to
have a serious discussion. Either way, he looks bad.

I have no idea if the Obama campaign is going to do anything like this.
But it’s the only way I see out of their rut.


My Slate
========

September 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/slate2)

* * * * *

Well, it’s election day in Massachusetts. (If you don’t know what’s
going on, check out this actually quite nice website:
[wheredoivotema.com](http://www.wheredoivotema.com/)) And, since nobody
else seems to be, I thought I’d tell you who I’m voting for. (I live in
central Cambridge and will be voting in the Democratic primary, for what
it’s worth.)

**Senate:** Edward J. O’Reilly. Ed O’Reilly is against the war in Iraq,
supports single-payer health care, and actually wants to fight for
things in Washington. John Kerry lost to George W. Bush, is running on
his ability to earmark money for the state, and didn’t spend the last
ten million in his Presidential campaign so he could spend it on this
Senate race. (He claims he saved it for a Florida recount-type
situation, as if nobody would donate money to him if the election was
again hanging by a thread.) Kerry has an inspiring story; he came back
from Vietnam to work to end the war and entered Congress promising not
to send soldiers to another such battle. But he’s sold out, and that’s
exactly what he did.

**House (District 8):** Michael E. Capuano. I don’t know much about
Capuano, although he seems a reliable liberal vote, but he’s running
unopposed.

**Councillor (Sixth District):** Roseann Trifoni-Mazzuchelli. This was a
tough one. Councillors apparently mainly vet judicial nominations.
Roseann is an (admittedly somewhat crazy-seeming) outsider campaigning
on a platform of anti-corruption and tough-on-pedophiles. Personally, I
think we’re too tough on pedophiles, but I have to balance that on
wanting a fervent anti-corruptionist to shake things up. I ended up
going with Roseann.

**State Senate (1 Suffolk + Middlesex):** Anthony W. Petruccelli. I know
literally nothing about this guy, but (suprise!) he’s running unopposed.
(Geez, this is getting boring; maybe I should run against one of these
people.)

**State House (25 Middlesex):** Alice K. Wolf. Unopposed. Former mayor
of Cambridge, supporter of gay marriage, and took the NPAT, so she can’t
be all bad.

**Register of Probate (Middlesex):** I was going to just say “John R.
Buonomo”, because he’s running unopposed and honestly, it’s Register of
Probate, so who cares? but a quick Google search finds he’s been
suspended and is currently on trial for — get this — stealing thousands
of dollars in change from government xerox machines. So my first thought
is “Why is he still on the ballot?” and my second thought is “Who steals
thousands of dollars in change from xerox machines?” He has since
[resigned](http://www.boston.com/news/local/breaking_news/2008/09/lawyer_middlese_1.html)
to fight the charges, although
[apparently](http://wbztv.com/local/middlesex.county.register.2.812554.html)
they have surveillance footage.

On the other hand, the Probate Court’s website says it was paid for by
him personally, so maybe it was for a good cause. (Or at least it does
in the Google cache; the current version has been scrubbed of him.)

So, uh, I guess I write-in for Marie A. Gardin, who was sworn in as
interim register of probate. Or leave it blank? Ah, I see that the
papers and blogs are all endorsing [Tom
Concannon](http://www.wickedlocal.com/newton/news/x256654767/Former-Newton-mayor-runs-for-county-seat),
former mayor of Newton, who supports abolishing Register of Probate as
an elected office. Good enough for me.

Write in: “Thomas B. Concannon, 8 Bacon Rd., Newton” or [get a
sticker](http://blogs.townonline.com/newton/?p=33631).

*Update:* Voted without incident. Polls were pretty empty but the system
was extremely orderly.


High Gas Prices Are Reagan’s Fault
==================================

September 18, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/reagangas)

* * * * *

A decade from now, when the seas begin to rise and the earth begins to
boil, who will get blamed? Surely not George W. Bush, who spent 8
crucial years denying the problem, slowing the movement of other
countries, and giving India and China an excuse for delay.

As evidence, look at what happen to Jimmy Carter. He called for a
national investment in alternative energy so that gas-guzzling cars
would be a thing of the past. Reagan scuttled all that and today as oil
prices rise we have very little in the way of alternatives ready. But
the sainted Reagan is never blamed.


Blame the Terrorist Black Muslims
=================================

October 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/blameblacks)

* * * * *

As John McCain sinks in the polls, it’s been amazing to watch one of
America’s two major parties adopt wholesale an insane racist conspiracy
theory and to watch the mainstream media lap it up. Back when
Republicans were insisting that the Clintons ran an underground
drug-smuggling ring and murdering their political opponents, you at
least had to send away for the video. Now it’s broadcast 24-hours-a-day
on CNN and Fox.

The claims, outlined in [this seizure-inducing Web
ad](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rk5aM5wP25M) (since deleted from
McCain’s site), are basically that Barack Obama, left-wing terrorists,
and inner-city blacks have teamed up to cause the mortgage meltdown and
commit voter fraud to ensure Obama wins the election. Yes, in an era
when huge banks are failing left and right and the Republican is down 14
points in the polls, Republicans are convinced that poor
African-Americans must be responsible. If only!

It’s all blatant lies, of course, but it’s really been incredible to
watch the Republicans be forced into such lunacy. And, of course, it’s
undoubtedly setting the stage for more repression and violence against
powerless blacks. And ACORN, one of the few organizations that actually
helps these communities, is just being shredded by the media because of
these false allegations. Of course, it’s also a cover for ongoing
attempts at voter intimidation and other sleazy tactics to steal the
election.

There’s a lot of confusion about what happened, so let me explain it
simply: as the dot-com bubble was bursting, Alan Greenspan looked for a
new place to park all that cash. And the answer was houses. It was a
dot-com bubble repeat in slow-motion. Prices rose and rose, people
started withdrawing [hundreds of thousands of dollars in
equity](http://www.irvinehousingblog.com/blog/comments/generation-pwned/)
from their house, “experts” on CNBC (like
[David](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0385514344.01.LZZZZZZZ.jpg)
[Lereah](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0385514352.01.LZZZZZZZ.jpg))
said that housing prices would always go up, brokers started issuing
mortgages to everyone with a pulse, everyone began buying and flipping
homes.

The mortgages were sold to upstream firms, among them Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, which conservatives had insisted on privatizing to let the
market’s magic work. The upstream firms packaged them into securities to
sell to the big pile of money and then all bought insurance on each
other to ensure that if one failed the whole thing would come crashing
down. (Conservatives refused to regulate the insurance market — the
government isn’t smarter than these big banks, they said.)

Fail it did, as soon as the housing bubble burst and housing prices
returned to their normal levels. This meant the new mortgages weren’t
worth paying back, meaning the mortgage-backed securities were
worthless, meaning it was time to collect on the insurance, meaning the
whole system came crashing down. And thus, the bailout.

You can see why conservatives might prefer to blame it all on blacks.

These tactics infuriate me. I don’t know how to stop them, but I will do
my small part by [donating to ACORN](http://www.acorn.org/?12344). I
hope you’ll join me.


In Defense of Anonymity
=======================

October 24, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tor2web)

* * * * *

In 1787, when America’s framers wanted to argue for its Constitution,
they published their arguments (the Federalist Papers) anonymously.
Whistleblowers have released everything from the Pentagon Papers to the
Downing Street Memos. Anonymous speech is a First Amendment right.

And yet, on the supposedly Wild West frontier of the Internet,
publishing anonymously is not so easy. Hosting providers require a name
and credit card, which they have to hand over to the FBi at the drop of
a National Security Letter. Free hosting sites zealously obey takedown
requests and require publishers to reveal their identity if they want
their stuff put back up (a tactic Scientologists have used). Luckily
there are now services like [Wikileaks](http://wikileaks.org/), but they
only publish a very narrow range of content.

But, talking with Virgil Griffith and others, I hit upon a new way of
allowing for anonymous publishing. The amazing [Tor
project](http://www.torproject.org/) lets you use the Internet
anonymously, by disguising your traffic thru a long series of relays.
Less well-known is that it also allows for anonymous publishing, by
running the system in reverse. Unfortunately, you need the Tor software
to visit anonymously-published sites, but we realized there’s no reason
this need be so.

So I dusted off some work I’d begun years and years ago and build a
tor2web proxy. Now anyone with a web browser can visit an anonymous Tor
URL like
[http://sexy36iscapohm7b.onion/](http://sexy36iscapohm7b.onion/) from
any Web browser, without any special software, just by going to:

[http://sexy36iscapohm7b.tor.theinfo.org/](http://sexy36iscapohm7b.tor.theinfo.org/)

Which means that publishing an anonymous website is now also fairly
easy. ([There are instructions on the Tor
site](https://www.torproject.org/docs/tor-hidden-service.html.en) — just
replace the `.onion` when you hand out the URL. If that’s too tricky,
you could use an existing provider like [Freedom
Hosting](http://xqz3u5drneuzhaeo.tor.theinfo.org/).)

tor2web proxies act like any other sort of proxy or router; they just
route traffic from a client to a server and don’t get involved
themselves, so they can’t be held legally responsible for the content
that passes thru them. But to prevent against a single point of failure,
I’m asking others [to set up tor2web
nodes](http://tor.theinfo.org/config) to distribute the load. The next
step, of course, [is to support
mirroring](http://tor.theinfo.org/mirror) so that people can still find
interesting files, even if one hidden server goes down.

Here’s to anonymity — and more tools protecting it.


What Could Happen
=================

October 31, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whatcouldhappen)

* * * * *

My usual attitude is one of skepticism toward politicians. They
routinely disappoint. But, for a moment, let’s take the opposite
scenario. What’s the most that we could hope for?

Barack Obama grew up middle class and black. Obviously intelligent, he
left school knowing he wanted to make a difference, but unsure how.
Inspired by the civil rights movement and SNCC, he joined various
progressive organizations like NYPIRG and worked as a community
organizer.

He then entered law school and graduated highly, but instead of taking a
clerkship went back to Chicago to write a book about race relations and,
later, run a voter registration drive. He taught Constitutional Law and
joined the board of various progressive foundations. He turned his
sights toward politics, where he’s spent the last ten years,
representing largely progressive districts.

Throughout his political career, he has been criticized for being overly
cautious and moderate. But he’s been taken unusual pains to reach out to
left-wing journals (including fairly obscure ones) who have leveled such
criticisms, talked to them personally, and tried to defend himself.

In his presidential campaign, he’s raised hundreds of millions of
dollars, much of it coming from small-dollar donors. He’s built a
grassroots organization never seen before in this country, with millions
of well-coordinated members. Through an incredibly well-executed
campaign and a series of eloquent speeches, he seems poised to take the
presidency with both houses of Congress, a solid majority, and a strong
mandate.

This is unique. He hasn’t spent enough time in politics to get chewed up
by the system. He hasn’t become dependent on a handful of big-money
donors. He comes from a background of progressive politics. And he has
an army of cash and people behind him.

Let’s say he wanted to reform health care, an issue towards the top of
Americans’ minds and a task that’s necessary to balance the budget and
get real wages rising again. The majority of the country supports a
single-payer program, like in every other industrialized nation, but
because of the vast influence of money in politics, it’s often been
considered politically impossible to achieve.

But Obama could pull it off. With his eloquence, he could easily sell
the plan to the country. The Democratic majority in both houses would
get him most of the votes he needed. With his fundraising and volunteer
network, he could threaten to have primary challengers replace any
Congresspeople who disagree. (Obama personally has raised around \$700M.
The average Congressional campaign costs less than \$1M.) With his
tactical shrewdness, he could outwit industry lobbying groups.

Across a wide variety of such issues, it’s possible to imagine a
President Obama getting such things done. He has sufficient skill,
background, and power to pull it off. It’s hard to imagine a similar
situation in history. (FDR, who Obama is often compared to, came from a
very upper-class background and was strongly pulled by the far-left
inspired by the Depression.)

Do I think it will happen? No. The far-right spent these final days
shrieking that Obama is a closet socialist who will take this country
into a new era of single-payer health care, strong financial regulation,
revitalized unions, progressive taxation, a green economy, and universal
voting rights. I wish it were so.

Instead, Obama has proposed the most moderate and cautious plan of all
Democratic candidates, repeatedly refused to make ideological challenges
out of fear of alienating voters, caved on even obvious questions like
illegal wiretapping, surrounded himself with old centrist party hacks,
and spent most of his campaign arguing for vague generalities like
“change” rather than specific policy proposals. So all signs point to
Obama being another cautious moderate.

But the striking thing is that none of these are dispositive. It’s
possible to imagine that, like W, Obama has run a quiet campaign focused
on building an electoral majority which he plans to use to push through
the policies he truly favors. It’s implausible (the hardest thing to
explain away is the FISA vote; even my most hopeful side can’t think of
any decent explanation for that) but it is possible. And it will only be
more likely if we fight for it.

If we don’t it seems Obama’s most likely path is to become what the
left’s pundits call “a more competent steward of empire” — do a bunch of
reasonable, sensible things that will probably have quite positive
effects on the lives of most Americans, while leaving all the
fundamentals untouched. But while that would be a welcome respite from
the past eight years, let’s not squander this rare opportunity for
something more.

[*Now playing:* [Neil Young - “Flags of
Freedom”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h2EDi-QZ4Es)]


Whatever It Takes?
==================

November 1, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whateverittakes)

* * * * *

The big book right now in liberal education circles is Paul Tough’s
*Whatever It Takes* — and with good reason. The book is touching and
delightful; it deftly mixes an intellectual history of the academic
debates around poverty with an on the ground look at programs to
alleviate it, all in the best magazine feature style. But I found the
book disturbing in what it left out: the topics it failed to discuss and
the questions it failed to ask. For a book about education, there sure
wasn’t much in the way of critical thinking.

The book’s practical hero is Geoffrey Canada, an African-American who
graduated from the Harlem ghettos to running local programs to help
others do the same. But he quickly became frustrated at the small scale
at which he worked, “saving lives” one and two at a time, when thousands
of others were all around him. So he decides to adopt a multiblock area
of Harlem, which he calls the Harlem Children’s Zone, and do “whatever
it takes” to make sure the kids in it get to and graduate from college:
parent training, afterschool programs, entirely new schools. And, the
story goes, there are fits and starts along the way, but he’s really hit
on something big: the schools are a success, the press loves the story,
Barack Obama vows to expand the program to a dozen more cities.

And yet. The schools are considered a success because they pass New York
State’s standardized tests. And they do that because their
principals—under pressure from Canada to raise scores—turn the schools
into 24-hour test prep centers. Kids start taking practice tests in the
middle of 3rd grade and repeat them every six months so that they’ve
near-memorized them by the time they have to take them for real. The
school day is lengthened and summer break is skipped so that there’s
more time for test prep. There are even test prep sessions on weekends
to make sure every kid gets the right grade.

A couple characters—including the middle school principal—object,
spouting lines about “teaching the whole child” and insisting it’s a bad
idea to replace music and art with more test prep. But they’re given
little quarter by the book and Canada eventually fires them because
they’re not “getting results” (i.e. high test scores). Most of the
remaining teachers leave *en masse* after that.

It’s weird. When it comes to their own kids, safely enrolled at suburban
private schools, liberals don’t seem to have much trouble seeing the
problems with high-stakes testing and the importance of music and art,
but when it comes to the urban poor such concerns suddenly become
expendable, mere niceties that distract from the real business of
“tougher standards”. (For those who don’t know the problems with
standardized tests, here’s a few: Most of them are norm-referened,
designed to ensure half the kids fail. You do better at them by thinking
worse — skipping hard parts, guessing answers, skimming instead of
understanding. And I have yet to see evidence that raising test scores
leads to any good for kids.)

But there’s a more serious problem with the whole theory that underlies
the book. The story’s intellectual hero is James Heckman, a conservative
University of Chicago economist. Heckman has done a great deal of
research on “human capital” — his argument is that investing in early
childhood education pays off in the long run by making future workers
much more productive, and thus wealthy. To prove this, he cites a number
of studies, the most famous of which was on Perry Preschool. In that
study, researchers followed a bunch of black kids in Ypsilanti, Michigan
and gave half of them free preschool. Tracking them down again at age 27
and age 40, they found the kids who went to preschool stayed in school
longer, graduated from high school more, had fewer teen pregnancies and
arrests, and made more money. Clearly we should give everyone free
preschool!

I have nothing against more free preschool, but this argument is flawed.
What makes people stay in school, not get arrested, and make more money
isn’t preschool but a good job. A long line of research has shown that
when kids have the prospect of a good job in front of them, they tend to
buckle down and work harder. Conversely, when jobs disappear, kids turn
to drugs and crime and ditching school—after all, why not?

But the Perry Preschool Program didn’t create any new good jobs for
those kids. It just redistributed the ones that already existed, giving
them to the kids who went to preschool instead of those who didn’t. If
everyone in Ypsilanti had gone to preschool, things would be right back
where they were before. (More technically, assume that an increase in
human capital increases a worker’s productivity. Universal preschool
increases the productivity of workers while leaving their supply at the
same level. If supply outstrips demand (i.e. there’s unemployment),
wages will be unchanged.)

If we truly want every kid to succeed, we need to create jobs for all of
them. And that will take fiscal and monetary stimulus, not just better
schools.


November 4
==========

November 7, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nov4)

* * * * *

I awoke early to vote for change. It was an unseasonably gorgeous fall
day, bright sunlight glinting of the color-changing trees and making
everything look golden, the air warm and comfortable. I walked to my
polling place, just blocks away, in the basement of city hall. The line
stretched out the door and around the building. It was clear this was no
ordinary election. “I’ve never seen anything like this,” one old-timer
commented. “I’ve never voted here before,” another explained.

An elderly man brought a chair to sit on while he waited, I chatted with
friends I spotted behind me in line — it seemed as if the whole
neighborhood was here. Nobody minded. Spirits were bright and the
pollworkers seemed almost giddy at getting to oversee the process. Few
of the elections were contested and the winner of the Massachusetts’
electoral votes was a foregone conclusion, but everyone felt a need to
be there.

I grabbed some breakfast and dispatched some errands and then grabbed my
companion for the trip to nearby New Hampshire. The night before I had
persuaded her to drive me up and volunteer. A swing state, just an hour
away, I pointed out. Won’t it be fun to join in one of the biggest and
most impressive volunteer operations in history? Convinced, we set the
GPS for Manchester City Center and drove off toward history.

Manchester is not a big city. Elm, its main drag, is crammed with office
buildings and city hall and sports stadiums side-by-side as if no one
would find them if they were spread farther apart. If it gives off any
impression, it’s one of New England homeiness: brownstone buildings,
divey diners with pizza and subs. Wandering the streets, I couldn’t help
but think of Jed Bartlett bundled against the cold, buttonholing a
senior staffer. I literally bounced with excitement. The streets were
filled with optimism and it seemed like every street bum and cashier and
radio was talking about the election.

The Obama office was on Elm Street, just further down, as the buildings
thinned out and begun to look somewhat abandoned. Next door were what
looked like abandoned carpet showrooms turned into headquarters for
local political campaigns, a huge billboard proclaiming “SUNUNU” loomed
in the distance. Behind it was a packed parking lot in front of an
elegant cemetery. We parked the car and headed back around to the front
door, passing laughing kids carrying doorhangers, rows of portapotties,
a mountain of discarded pizza boxes, and a few big bags of plastic
bottles and packaged lunches.

Shy at the best of times, I couldn’t summon the courage and walk through
the door and lay myself on the line — so I pushed my companion to do it
first. The notion filled her with dread and, clutching her stomach, she
ran back around to the portapotties to vomit. “You can’t just expect me
to march into a campaign office with no warning like that,” she
complained. “You need to sign up, get an assignment, pick a shift.” I
disagreed, pointing to a couple emails I’d gotten on my phone urging me
to head down to the closest Obama office as quickly as possible. She was
not persuaded. At a stalemate, we decided to go grab some pizza and
summon our courage.

Newly fortified, I bravely marched into the office. Stairs led up to a
receiving platform. One door was labeled phonebanking, another
canvassing, and an office seemed to lie behind the front desk. At the
top of the stairs peering out over the railing stood a broad-shouldered
guy in a green shirt. “You here to volunteer?” he asked us as we walked
in. “How can we help?” I asked. “Perfect!” he said. “Come on up here.”

Once we were within his sights, he began his spiel, full of energy.
“We’re making history today! This is the most important election of our
lifetime and we need you to help. And the way you’re going to make
history”— he grabbed a manila folder off the counter —“is by going to
going to Sandown.” “No,” said the girl sitting behind the front desk.
“Bedford.” He placed the file back and grabbed a new one from the girl.
“Forget Sandown, you’re not going to make history in Sandown. You’re
going to make history in Bedford.”

A couple young girls walked in, also wanting to volunteer, and he
quickly pulled them into our group. “You’re going to make history today
in Bedford. We need to get every single person out to the polls.” He
opened the file and pulled out a map. “Now what you’re going to do is
head over to our Bedford staging area and they’re going to give you your
assignment.” He handed out directions and made sure everyone understood.
“Now it’s not going to be a big building like this — it’s going to be a
house we’re borrowing with a ton of cars parked outside.” We all nodded.

“Sounds good? Are you fired up? Ready to go? Let’s make history!
Remember — we’re counting on you. Oh, one more thing—” he turned to one
of the girls. “Did you vote for change today?” She nodded. He handed her
a “I voted for change” Obama sticker. “Did you vote for change today?”
“Yep.” Sticker. “Did you vote for change today?” “I voted for change
weeks ago,” my companion explained. He grinned and handed her a sticker.
And I got one too. “Now let’s make history!” And with this enthusiastic
sendoff, we headed back to our cars to drive to Bedford.

Bedford is a sleepy little suburban town with houses three times the
size of San Francisco mansions and lawns bigger than the houses. As
promised, the Bedford staging center was one of them, with cars filling
the enormous driveway and stretching out onto the street. As we walked
the path up to the front door, little signs had been posted in the
grass, together spelling out a quote from Barack Obama about the
importance of activism and change, a couple sentences at a time.

Inside was the typical suburban home, except filled with campaign
workers milling around. It reminded me a bit of what it looks like when
someone’s house is borrowed for filming. “Water and granola to the left,
canvas packets to the right,” someone explained. We headed right, into
the living room, where a man behind a table was lecturing to a group of
maybe twenty or thirty people. He was just finishing up as we arrived.

“Well, I’ve talked for long enough. But here’s the basic idea. You go
thru the packet, you find people who weren’t home or hadn’t voted yet,
you knock on their doors and you mark the result down. Got it?” People
nodded, grabbed their clipboards, and headed out. We went up and grabbed
a clipboard of our own. “What do you say?” we asked. “You say: ‘Hi, I’m
here for change. We need change this election. And Barack Obama and
Jeanne Shaheen are the change we need.’ (We support Lynch too but he
doesn’t need our help.) This isn’t like normal canvassing. If you spend
more than a minute at a house you’re doing it wrong. And you need to
take your car—houses here are so far apart that it can take three
minutes to walk from one to another.” We grabbed some doorhangers and
headed off, leaving our name and number on a sheet indicating who was
working which turf. Kids were wandering around the apartment chatting as
we left. We certainly weren’t the only ones who had driven up from
Boston. Outside, the signs in this direction read “Fired up? Ready to
go!”

Canvassing in the suburbs seems about the last thing any kid would want
to spend your day doing. Here’s how it works: You’re given a clipboard
with a list of people. Each one has a name, age, gender, address, and
sometimes a phone number. They’re sorted by address. You find their
house, park outside, walk down their (looong) driveway, and knock on the
door. Usually, they’re not home and you check “not home” on the
clipboard and stick a doorhanger (which says “VOTE OBAMA TODAY”, gives
polling place information, and explains that college students and
unregistered people can still vote) on the door. You could tell the
folks who were out-of-town because they had a whole collection of
doorhangers, each one more urgent than the next — “VOTE OBAMA NOV. 4”,
“VOTE OBAMA TUESDAY”, “VOTE OBAMA TODAY!”

That’s probably the best case. If they’re home, you awkwardly try to
explain why you’re out here in the middle of nowhere knocking on their
door, and ask them to go vote. It was late in the day and our walk
packet had already been walked once before, so everyone we met had
already voted, for Obama naturally. (The exception was one couple who we
encountered walking to their car. They were heading out to vote, they
assured us.)

The first few times I was too nervous to say anything and let my
companion do all the talking, but after a few times of seeing what
peoples’ reaction were like (positive, friendly, and filled with
assurances they’d already voted for Obama) I begun speaking up and then
splitting the workload.

Out in the suburbs, you spend most of the time hunting for the right
house numbers (our walk list was careful to only include known
supporters, which meant most houses were skipped) and walking back to
your car. You get to see people, but not a particularly wide variety and
not for very long. A handful were very friendly and expressed their
appreciation that we were volunteering. One asked us to leave extra
doorhangers for her husband to see. (Naturally, her husband was not on
our list of Obama supporters.) It was wildly unrewarding work and it
quickly got late, forcing us to walk alongside streets without sidewalks
in the dark. (We hadn’t thought to bring flashlights.) Toward the end, I
ran into the one woman who was mean to us. Refusing the open the door
she shouted thru the window at me, angry I’d interrupted her cooking
dinner. (Of course she’d already voted.) Tired and frustrated, we headed
back to the staging center, only 3/4 of the way through the packet.

Back at the staging center, college girls were chatting with the house’s
owner, a well-coiffed woman with gold earrings and a pink sweater. Was
the kid running things here their son, they asked? “Kerry? Oh no, he’s
just a volunteer who’s been living here for the campaign.” Kerry, for
his part, was packing up and heading for Manchester. Like a professional
entertainer, his enthusiastic demeanor had been packed up too. He was
upset to hear we hadn’t made it through the whole walklist, but cheered
up when he learned it was one that had already been walked. “Find any
nonvoters?” he asked. “No,” I said, “except for one couple we caught on
their way to vote.” “Yeah, people here, they need a nudge maybe, but
they’re going to vote. Not like people in Manchester. There you gotta
pick ‘em up, walk ‘em to the polls, stand next to them in line, and then
stand behind them as they swear the affidavits.” (New voters without ID
or proof of address can vote by swearing an affidavit, as the doorhanger
explained.) He didn’t sound enthusiastic, just grimly determined.

“You know, New Hampshire was once won by just a couple hundred votes?”
“Wow,” I said, putting on my best isn’t-volunteering-important? tone.
“Of course, that was like a hundred years ago, but still.” And with
that, Kerry rushed out, telling one volunteer to email him and wishing
him luck with college.

The college girls were still chatting. “Wow, this is some good pizza,”
they said. “Hah,” said the house’s owner, “people think you can only get
good pizza in Boston, but Bedford proves otherwise.” “We’re going to
head back to Boston — we’ve all got election parties.”

There wasn’t much left to do here and with just 45 minutes until the
polls closed, chasing downtown voters to the polls didn’t sound like
much fun, so we decided to head back to Boston as well. Things were
pretty clear by the time we got there, but we dutifully watched the TV
and Web as the networks inched closer to calling it. When they finally
did, we could hear honks and cheers go up from outside our window.

McCain quickly conceded — even before the polls in Alaska had closed —
and Obama’s acceptance speech followed shortly thereafter. It was a
calm, studied affair. There were no big surprises — everything turned
out basically as had been predicted for the past month. “At this point,
FiveThirtyEight is just spoilers,” my companion observed. I didn’t feel
much enthusiasm, just relief. It had happened. It had really truly
happened. We sat quietly and let it sink in.

Apparently we were in the minority when it came to quiet acceptance.
Outside, we could hear drums banging and horns honking and people
screaming by. Harvard Square begun filling up with cheering people, as
far as the eye could see. I’ve never seen it so packed — folks said it
was even bigger than when the Red Sox won the World Series. Even the
police seem jubilant. “Were you expecting this?” someone asked them. “We
should have…”

The procession marched down Mass Ave, the city’s main street, picking up
people on the sidewalk as it went. Flags were hoisted, signs were waved,
people chanted “Yes We Did!” and “Time For Peace!” (“What do we want?”
“Change!” “When do we want it?” “Now!”) “Change begins tomorrow” became
“Change starts now”.

The police became increasingly aggravated at the march without a permit
and cop cars began flashing their sirens and trying to force people onto
the sidewalk while shouting at us with their megaphones. Folks were
pissed at them — there was some talk about fighting back or smashing the
Gap we passed — but cooler heads prevailed and folks just kept marching.

Finally, we headed into the new parkish thing outside Toscanini’s and
someone jumped on top of a table to give a speech. “Don’t stand on that,
please,” one of the cops asked, “it was named for one of my guys.” He
stood on top of a concrete embankment instead. I recognized a few faces
in the crowd and it became clear I wasn’t the only one who was back from
New Hampshire.

“We did this!” the guy on the concrete shouted. “Through our voting and
our volunteering, we changed this country. Making change won’t be easy,
but tonight we celebrate that we’ve changed who’s in the White House.”
The cops snickered. Another kid jumped on top of the concrete. “And pot
is legal!” he screamed. “Decriminalized!” shouted the cops. (A state
ballot proposition reducing the penalty for possession of reasonable
quantities of marijuana to a \$100 fine had passed.)

Soon things folded up and folks shuffled back to Harvard Square, peeling
off to their apartments as they went. I got back and watched CNN’s video
of similar street gatherings in cities across the country, saw Flickr
photos of similarly packed town centers. A lot of work lay ahead, but
for that night we could relax and say simply: we won.


The Credibility Gap
===================

November 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/campaignirony)

* * * * *

It was, you may recall, a truism of the campaign that Barack Obama did
not have the experience to “lead”, while Hillary Clinton and John McCain
clearly did. This was a difficult point to argue against politically —
voters knew that John McCain and Hillary Clinton had been in government
and on TV for many years and looked old and respected, while Barack
Obama looked young and new. And yet, the exact opposite was true: Barack
Obama was the only one of the three who was a competent leader.

This was seen, foremost, in the management of their campaigns. Hillary
Clinton’s campaign consisted of friends and loyalists, each with
poorly-defined job titles, who took every opportunity to attack their
coworkers for their own benefit. (“It was a terribly unpleasant place to
work,” [explained](http://www.newsweek.com/id/167582/output/print) a
Clinton staffer. “You had seven people on a morning call, all of whom
had tried to get someone else on the call fired, or knew someone on the
call tried to get them fired. It was not a recipe for cohesive team
building.”)

Spending was out of control, the campaign lurched from message to
message, and her senior advisors were woefully ill-advised. (Top
campaign strategist Mark Penn, who didn’t even quit his day job as CEO
of the most notorious corporate public relations and unionbusting firm,
didn’t even know that states awarded delegates proportionally.) Bill
kept interfering, backchanneling with staffers and giving speeches
without clearance, while Hillary got angry and threw fits.

This shouldn’t have been a surprise. [As far back as
2004](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/movable_type/2003_archives/001600.html),
Brad DeLong was trying to talk people out of supporting Hillary for
President, based on her total failure at health care reform in 1993/4.
His explanation is worth quoting at length:

> [W]hen senior members of the economic team said that key senators like
> Daniel Patrick Moynihan would have this-and-that objection, she told
> them they were disloyal. When junior members of the economic team told
> her that the Congressional Budget Office would say such-and-such, she
> told them (wrongly) that her conversations with CBO head Robert
> Reischauer had already fixed that. When long-time senior hill staffers
> told her that she was making a dreadful mistake by fighting with
> rather than reaching out to John Breaux and Jim Cooper, she told them
> that they did not understand the wave of popular political support the
> bill would generate. And when substantive objections were raised to
> the plan by analysts calculating the moral hazard and adverse
> selection pressures it would put on the nation’s health-care system…

Hillary fans later tried to assure him that she had change, but this
campaign seems to have borne out his original estimation.

John McCain’s campaign consisted of extremists pulled from Bush’s
entourage and beyond, who pressured the candidate into compromising his
instincts, policies, and principles. Used to running small, personal
insurgent campaigns, he let his Bush-backed campaign advisors spend
money on huge offices and ad buys meant to convey a sense of
inevitability. (It didn’t work — the Bush base never contributed the
money needed to pay for it all and it was largely scrapped when the
campaign went bankrupt.)

His policy advisors came not just from the Bush team, but from the gamma
quadrant. When McCain slipped up and said he wouldn’t meet with Latin
American dictators like the President of Spain, McCain’s foreign policy
advisor insisted this wasn’t a gaffe — that McCain wasn’t planning to
meet with the man who pulled his troops out of Iraq. On health care, the
centerpiece of their plan was to raise the price of insurance so that
people wouldn’t buy so much. On the economy — well, on the economy
McCain seemed to announce a new plan every day. He canceled his campaign
and flew to Washington to demand a meeting with the President on the
bailout bill, but when, in the meeting, he was asked what his position
was, he stormed out of the room. When the bill came to the floor, he
took credit for putting it together. When it failed, he took credit for
making sure it didn’t pass. When a modified version passed, he took
credit for that too. And in the debates, he seemed to announce new
programs off-the-cuff, like one plan to have the government buy up all
bad mortgages directly.

His management was similarly erratic. He liked to call staffers directly
with ideas, in a subversive attempt to overthrow his own chain of
command. He liked running his mouth off to the press and had to be
restrained by his own staffers. Indeed, his whole campaign seemed like a
struggle between two aspects of his personality. One knew what he had to
do to win and put structures in place to do it, the other wasn’t so big
on winning and tried to subvert those same structures.

When a spokesperson, Jill Hazelbaker, called Obama’s trip overseas a
“campaign rally” and “one giant photo opportunity”, McCain told the
press he disagreed and would speak to her about it. Upset, Hazelbaker
refused to come into work or return McCain’s phone calls. His campaign
manager told him he [had to
apologize](http://www.newsweek.com/id/167865/page/2) to his
spokesperson. Isn’t it supposed to work the other way around? Then
again, it does kind of explain why McCain addressed a group of
supporters as [“my fellow
prisoners”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYFm5kK4f1k).

Barack Obama was a serious contrast. He picked the most experienced and
talented staffers from the past Democratic campaigns. With a deft
understanding of how to manage large, volunteer organizations from his
days as a community organizer, he gave them clear roles and managed them
effectively. With millions of volunteers around the country, he built
what was probably one of the largest organizations in the country, and
the whole thing went off like clockwork, with everyone having clear,
achievable goals and being held accountable for meeting them — despite
the vast majority of them being unpaid volunteers!

When it came to policy, he put together advisory teams on each topic
that contained leading experts from a variety of perspectives and tried
to synthesize a coherent and centrist policy from each of them. The
results were not perfect, but they were far more detailed and thoughtful
than anyone expected from a Presidential candidate and tend to impress
policy experts. (Compare this to their usual reaction to campaign
material which is to hide their eyes and insist “well, (s)he really
doesn’t mean it.”)

His team had a strategy and message and, for the most part, stuck with
it, despite the usual fluctuations and setbacks. People weren’t
capriciously fired (with the exception of foreign policy advisor
Samantha Powers, who was axed for calling Hillary “a monster”) or
reshuffled. They did their jobs and they did them well. “No drama Obama”
was the slogan and they carried it out — no big changes or fights or
leaks.

His transition has shown a similar preparedness and focus. He
immediately assembled a council of varied and respected advisors on the
financial crisis and later other topics. (Although at times the teams’
membership criteria can be puzzling.) One member of his team talks to
the public (through Sunday show interviews and YouTube videos), while a
website keeps everyone up-to-date. His staff does a thorough review of
each candidate’s background and each agency’s operations. His team is
even reviewing every Bush executive order to see which ones need to be
overturned.

No doubt he will be a similar president: a competent manager, surrounded
by effective and experienced people, all trying to do good things
without fuss. The only remaining questions — remaining, clearly, because
the answers haven’t been decided yet — are who those people will be and
what good things they will carry out.


OCLC on the Run
===============

November 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/oclcreply)

* * * * *

OCLC is running scared. [My
comments](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/oclcscam) on their attempt to
monopolize library records has been Slashdotted, [our
petition](http://watchdog.net/c/stop-oclc) has received hundreds of
signatures, and they’re starting to feel the heat.

At a talk I gave this morning to area librarians, an OCLC rep stood up
and attempted to assure the crowd that what I was saying “wasn’t
entirely true”. “What wasn’t true?” I asked. “I’d love to correct
things.” She declined to say, insisting she “didn’t want to get into an
argument.”

This evening, OCLC’s Vice President for WorldCat and Metadata, provides
more details. In a blog comment (which, I understand, was sent to OCLC
members), she tries to downplay the issue, continuing the OCLC trend of
doublespeak about this serious change.

She tries to claim we’re on the same side (“We are likely in solid
agreement”) and insists they are just updating “the principles … which
have been in place since 1987” and absurdly claiming that the new rules
are just a “clarification”. (This is just one of a number of
black-is-white falsehoods in her post.)

But never once does she defend the actual changes. And they’re right
there in black-and-white: the records aren’t allowed to be used in
anything that “substantially replicates the function, purpose, and/or
size of WorldCat.” I’m not sure how much clearer they can get; these new
rules prohibit anyone from building anything that gets anywhere close to
WorldCat.

My fundamental point stands: As servers have gotten cheaper, it’s become
easy to do for free the things OCLC charges such outrageous amounts for.
But OCLC can’t have that — they’d have to give up their huge office
complex and high salaries (Ms. Calhoun was recently hired away from
academia, so her salary isn’t available yet, but her fellow VPs make
around \$300,000/year). So they’re trying to stamp out the competition.

Karen insists that “OCLC welcomes collaboration with Open Library”,
which seems a funny way of putting it. As I said last time, they’ve
played hardball: trying to cut off our funding, hurt our reputation, and
pressured libraries not to cooperate. When we tried to make a deal with
them, they dragged their feet for months, pretended to come to terms,
and then had their lawyers send us an “agreement” to sign that would
require we take all OCLC-related records off our site.

Karen, if you really want to “increas[e] information access to users
around the globe”, like you say, here’s an easy first step: put the 2
million WorldCat web pages you shared with Google and Yahoo up for
download on your website. It’s only a small portion of your catalog and
you’ve already shared it with others. Until you take even a baby step
like that, it’s hard to take your protestations of good intent
seriously.


Kafka for the Kindergarten Set
==============================

November 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kindergartenkafka)

* * * * *

Just as Bush’s Healthy Forests Initiative cut down more trees and his
Clean Skies Initiative increased pollution, his No Child Left Behind Act
hurt students, especially poor students. That this is a controversial
statement shows just how rare genuine child advocates are (compared to,
say, environmentalists) in policy debates.

NCLB requires every school administer standardized tests to their
students. If the scores are bad, they get punished. (This makes as much
sense as beating kids who lose races.) And it only gets worse from
there. Making high test scores the ultimate goal of education distorts
everything along the way, sending schools spiraling own into a
Kafkaesque nightmare of bureaucratic child torture.

[![Book
cover](image1_kindergartenkafka)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088024)

The story is told in up-close detail in Linda Perlstein’s *Tested*, a
profile of Tyler Heights elementary in Maryland. It’s a tale of such
thoroughgoing rot that it’s hard to even know where to begin. But let’s
start with the tests. They’re invasive and traumatic. They take time and
teachers away from class and scare students (especially since the kids
are led to believe they won’t graduate if they fail). They test narrow,
specific knowledge in dumb ways (“What text features made the directions
[in this cookie recipe] easy for third graders to follow?”). And they
make kids feel like failures in situations where teachers are prohibited
from helping.

The tests are just plain bad. Their questions are invariably annoying
and sometimes just plain bizarre (“Which word is made up of two
words?”). Of the handful of examples in the book (which are for 3rd
graders), even I get some of them wrong. They assume weird background
knowledge (which two presses are the same? “don’t press me”, “full-court
press”, “tailor press”, “press agent”, “pressing for an answer”) and
strange vocab (crabapples and cattails) and are just terribly written,
full of stilted jargon.

But that’s just the beginning. Since the tests are so all-important,
everything gets pushed around for them. Art and gym are cancelled
(although, for contractual reasons, not in the school Perlstein studied)
since they’re not tested, as is recess (this despite evidence recess
improves test scores!). But even more absurdly, science and social
studies are canceled too, since the test questions don’t address them.

The remaining time is spent teaching to the test. Test language
infiltrates everything. The only writing students ever do is sample
short-answer sections (“What text feature could have been added to help
a reader better understand the information?”, as opposed to writing your
own story). Even the stories kids read are analyzed only in terms of
potential test questions.

Much of class is filled with pure test-prep: no actual education, just
test-taking tricks. Some of it is common stuff — take deep breaths, work
until the time is called, eliminate obviously wrong answers — but most
of it is specific to the state’s bizarre test (special rules about how
to phrase written answers and which words to use for extra points). The
walls are filled with the school’s four-point plans for successful
responses, e.g. BATS, which stands for “borrow from the question, answer
the question, use text supports, stretch formula”.

It only gets worse from there. Apparently even non-stop test prep
doesn’t raise scores enough, so schools are forced to use
“evidence-based curricula” like “Saxon Math” and “Open Court Reading”.
These are special packages of textbooks and workbooks and scripts for
the teachers which prescribe specifically which stories and “text
features” should be taught in which order and in which way. (Teachers
can’t deviate from the script, of course, because that’s not
“evidence-based”.) The whole system must be purchased for a small
fortune from a major textbook company and supervisors occasionally drop
in to make sure the books are being used appropriately.

It’s clear the books don’t teach any actual understanding; they’re just
teaching kids to memorize the answers to various test prep questions.
When asked a question, the students just cycle through random
combinations of test buzzwords until they hit upon the right answer.
Since they never get to read for fun, or even read for anything other
than dissecting text features, they presumably learn to hate reading
too.

But the stilted curricula is just the beginning of the scammers. In
their desperation to raise scores up, schools are open to predation by a
whole suite of consultants and teams who promise to have the winning
secret to raising test scores. (One of the book’s most poignant scenes
comes at an educational conference, when one such scam artist takes
credit for the profiled school’s test score rise.) And so the teachers
are forced to do absurd things like write the state educational
guidelines they plan to fulfill that day on the board, assign practice
tests weekly, have their teaching evaluated by non-educators who observe
them for fifteen minutes, and hold school assemblies on test prep
featuring men in furry blue muppet costumes.

Together, it’s a frightening picture: no recess, no science, no social
studies, no leaving your chair or working in groups, just sitting in
your seat, listening to scripts and test-prep advice, before worrying
you’re about fail school because you have no idea what they’re saying.
This is what they mean when they say “No Child Left Behind”.

* * * * *

Every year, a couple months before school ends, a kind of controlled
experiment happens in NCLB schools: The principal remains the same, the
teachers remain the same, the students remain the same. The only thing
that changes is that the test is over, forgotten until next year starts.
And suddenly everything changes: test prep boards come off the wall,
students start writing poetry, they go on field trips and do science
experiments, they work in groups and do real reading.

I challenge anyone to watch both schools and insist that the first is
better for our kids. I don’t think you could do it. So, of course,
nobody watches. Decisions on these laws are made far away, in DC, by
folks whose only experience of public school comes from staged photo
ops.

Everyone loves to critique No Child Left Behind. Democrats say it isn’t
fully funded, Republicans say it interferes too much with local control
of schools. But this is just tinkering around the edges — nobody
disagrees with the fundamental premise. After all, what politician can
be against accountability?

The only question left is: who will hold them accountable?

[image1_kindergartenkafka]: image1_kindergartenkafka.jpg

An Obama Story
==============

November 18, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/obamastory)

* * * * *

[John
Comaroff](http://anthropology.uchicago.edu/courses/faculty/johncomaroff.shtml)
is a professor of anthropology at the University of Chicago, where
Barack Obama used to teach. Obama still lives in the neighborhood, Hyde
Park. Recently, [on the radio show *Open
Source*](http://www.brown.edu/Departments/Watson_Institute/Open_Source/RadioOpenSource-John_Comaroff.mp3),
Comaroff told this story:

> We have a cleaner in our building — 70-something-year-old African
> American guy; sweet, sweet guy. And every evening he comes into our
> office about six and takes our garbage and stuff. … He didn’t come in
> on Tuesday — I was up late, working until I went to see election
> results.
>
> Of course, Hyde Park was abuzz. Hyde Park thinks of this election as
> its own. And the fact that the Obama kids were at school on Tuesday
> and Wednesday, and we all had to ride around the TV cameras to get to
> our parking, was the kind of masochistic pleasure that we’re having in
> Hyde Park, which after all has always been told it’s the fringe of the
> nation. We’ve always been told that nothing we do or say counts
> anywhere else, especially not across the border in Indiana. So to
> suddenly find ourselves at the center of the political process is
> interesting.
>
> So [on Wednesday] the guy comes into my office and I say “So, where
> were you yesterday?” “Ah,” he says, “I was in Grant Park [where Obama
> gave his victory speech].” “Grant Park?” “Yeah, right near the front —
> I could have touched Barack Obama.” “How did you get there? It’s tough
> to get tickets.”
>
> He said “You don’t understand. A few years back, I worked Law School,
> I cleaned the Law School. And Obama’s office was on my run. He worked
> late many nights and he was really interested. I’d come by cleaning
> and he’d always stop me for a chat. Sometimes he’d share food with me
> — he always brought food in — and the thing was, he sat down and he
> talked to me. He said ‘Tell me about your community. Tell me what’s
> going on out there. I wanna know. I wanna know what’s out there on the
> streets. I wanna know how America is living.’”
>
> And one got the sense that this guy, alienated from the political
> process, alienated from the work process, found in Obama a real human
> being.


Inside GE
=========

November 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/insidege)

* * * * *

For the past six months or so, I’ve been working on getting data out of
government in various ways. At one point, I was looking thru SEC files
online and noticed that some portions were redacted. I filed a Freedom
of Information request for the redacted portion and any documents
pertaining to why it was redacted. It ended up costing \$28 and to make
sure I get the most for my money, I thought I’d share the results with
you:

> **Confidential Treatment Requested by General Electric Company**
>
> **1. Please refer to comment 5 of our letter dated August 21, 2007.
> Please provide a more detailed analysis justifying the omission of
> disclosure […] that specifically sets fort the manner in which
> competitors could use the information to obtain the competitive
> advantage cited in your response.**
>
> **Response**
>
> *[\*\*\* Confidential treatment requested for the paragraphs below:*
>
> General Electric Company’s (“GE” or the “Company”) long-term
> performance awards program (the “LTPA”) is based on four equally
> weighted business measurements, which are: (a) average earnings per
> share growth rate; (b) average revenue growth rate; (c) cumulative
> return on total capital; and (d) cumulative cash flow from operating
> activities. As indicated in the Company’s response letter, dated
> October 10, 2007, these business measurements are used to establish
> financial goals (the “Goals”) for the Company over a three-year period
> and are directly derived from the Company’s internal, confidential
> business plan. Each of the Goals involves confidential information
> that, if made public, [REDACTED] [REDACTED] For example, upon the
> announcement of a sizable acquisition, debt investors generally
> examine the companies ability to fund the acquisition and to service
> its existing debt and [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] will be
> affected by the acquisition. This point is illustrated by the
> Company’s December 26, 2007 announcement that GE Capital would acquire
> certain assets and businesses from Merill Lynch Capital. Although
> immaterial to GE Capital, after the announcement of the acquisition
> [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] Based on its experience the Company
> believes that [REDACTED] in the Goals such as [REDACTED] acquisition
> [REDACTED] like the Merill Lynch Capital acquisition [REDACTED]
> [REDACTED] The Company believes that disclosing the goals would
> [REDACTED] [REDACTED] the Goals [REDACTED] [REDACTED] [REDACTED] As a
> result, the Company’s [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
>
> […] We do not believe that the SEC’s executive compensation disclosure
> rules should cause the disclosure of the Goals simply because the
> Company’s Management Development and Compensation Committee chose to
> include them in the LTPA. Such disclosure would have the unintended
> and harmful effect of [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
>
> The Company therefore believes that it would suffer substantial
> competitive harm if ti had to disclose the Goals because it would
> [REDACTED] [REDACTED]
>
> *End of request for confidential treatment \*\*\*]*

Hope that helps. At least the SEC uses white-out instead of black
marker.


Obama’s Strategy: A Debate
==========================

November 22, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/obamastrat)

* * * * *

**[A Liberal Shock
Doctrine](http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=a_liberal_shock_doctrine)**:
Our economy is collapsing. There’s a Democratic majority in the House
and possibly a supermajority in the Senate. In the last election, both
parties campaigned on change and the candidate accused of socialism won,
by a solid majority. There will never be another time like now.

Obama must take swift action to pass radical change. Fill the cabinet
with vocal progressives, push a series of strong progressive bills thru
Congress, take full advantage of the first hundred days. Anything else
will squander the promise of this election.

* * * * *

*[The Audacity of
Patience](http://prospect.org/cs/articles?article=the_audacity_of_patience)*:
If Obama tries to pass his wishlist in the first hundred days, it will
blow up in his face. Not because America is a center-right country, but
because it’s a left-wing one. The radical conservatives knew it was
unlikely they would hold on to power, so they had to do as much as they
could in the time they had. Progressives don’t face that deadline; it
now seems possible to permanently destroy this incarnation of the
Republicans Party.

What’s needed is not urgent action, but the slow and careful work of
building an enduring majority. That means bringing in Republicans,
occupying the rhetorical (if not political) center, and passing
incremental steps that lead to lasting change. But most importantly, it
means being effective. We don’t need partisans, we need people with
experience who can get things done. Even moderate bills passed now can
ensure Democratic domination for a generation, allowing plenty of
opportunity to improve things in the decades to come.

* * * * *

**Open the Overton Window:** This is how it starts. First it’s the
campaign, then the first hundred days, then the midterms, then
reelection, then more midterms, and then the next nominee’s campaign
(who is unlikely to be as talented or progressive as this one). There’s
always an excuse to put off the important changes.

If you’re serious about lasting change, hiring moderates is the wrong
way to go. It doesn’t attract Republicans; it just sends the message
Democrats aren’t serious. The electorate likes success; if success comes
from Democrats, then they’ll like Democrats. A progressive cabinet can
move the ball forward by having their agencies implement countless small
reforms while using their status as public figures to build support for
bigger ones. All of which will further cement the Democrats’ reputation
as the party of progress. The country isn’t left-wing because it likes
people with blue logos and D’s next to their names; it’s left-wing
because it wants shared prosperity and security. If Democrats don’t
deliver, they’ll turn to someone else.

* * * * *

*Spin Up the Noise Machine:* It’s not the Cabinet’s job to push new
policy ideas. They can’t — their job is to push the President’s agenda
and promote official doctrine. Building support for new ideas is the job
of the ideological infrastructure that Democrats have been building over
the past eight years: CAP, CAF, TAP, and the rest. Sure, during the Bush
Administration they had to spend all their time fighting bad ideas, but
with a Democratic president they can start rallying support for good
ones.

And a President who leads as a consensus figure will be much more
effective at passing them. America is sick of fierce partisanship; it
longs for a government it can believe in again. A Cabinet of moderates
and conservatives will be much more convincing salespeople for
progressive proposals than a group of fire-breathing liberals.

* * * * *

**An American Renewal:** Do you seriously believe that? Sure, we can all
agree this administration has been a disaster, but once Bush and his
cronies recede into the distance, this coalition of moderates and
conservatives will fall apart. The factions will start sniping at each
other in the press, use their control over staff to advance their own
agendas, and just generally try to sabotage the President’s proposals —
and with it, his appearance of effectiveness.

This country has been very badly misrun for almost a decade. Shills for
industry pervade the regulators, conservative loyalists have burrowed
deep into every agency, and public discussion has been pulled so far
right that most people don’t even remember what a left-wing idea looks
like. (As opposed to the purely *factual* questions the left has been
consistently correct about.) What’s needed is a process of serious
American renewal. A bunch of DC think-tanks pushing policy papers isn’t
going to do it; the problems are serious enough that leadership has to
come from the top.

* * * * *

*Blow-Up:* Which brings me back to where I started. You can’t just spin
this country around in an instant; it will take years of hard work.
Sure, a coalition of moderates may end up falling apart, but a group of
fervent partisans will never get off the ground. Even with the crisis,
America just isn’t ready for a complete policy reversal. Our best hope
is to take them there gradually — passing increasingly ambitious policy,
appointing increasingly progressive officials, electing increasingly
progressive candidates. There are no quick fixes; that’s what we’ll have
to do if you really want to win.


Blogs I Would Like to Read
==========================

November 25, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/blogs2make)

* * * * *

(in no particular order)

**The Wonk Wing:** Thoughtful exploration of important policy issues by
decent writers who are clearly fascinated by their subject. Not only
would you get a first-class education in the relevant issues around
health care, global warming, urban sprawl, zoning, traffic, sewage, etc.
but you’d have fun while doing it. Think [Ezra
Klein](http://ezraklein.com/) for more than just health care. Think [The
Wonk Room](http://wonkroom.thinkprogress.org/) but more Sorkin and less
Pennebaker. (Sorry, Wonk Room!)

**Perfect Devices:** Coverage of things which are simply the
best-in-the-world at what they do, and the stories of how they got
there. I want stories from the people who calibrate bathroom-mirror
lighting to be the perfect combination of brightness and diffusion “so
that it’s diagnostically acute without being brutal” (ASFTINDA, 302). I
want stories about the kitchen at *French Laundry* and *Alinea*. I want
the start-to-finish story of HF&J designing a typeface. (Yes, I’m
eagerly awaiting *[Objectified](http://www.objectifiedfilm.com/)*.)

**17th and Pennsylvania:** This is the address of the Starbucks outside
the White House, where apparently executive branch officials regularly
grab coffee, chat, and meet with a wide variety of famous-for-DC types.
Why doesn’t an enterprising Gawker Stalker simply sit there and write
down what happens?

**This Academic Life:** Stories of new papers and research results — not
just a summary of the work itself, but the story of how it fits into the
field’s debates, the personal intrigues of the players, the implications
for the wider world. Basically, *Lingua Fraca* returning as a blog.

**Evisceration Quarterly:** A daily selection of the finest in insults,
takedowns, and general argumentative
[evisceration](http://delicious.com/tag/evisceration). The motto:
teaching you how to think by showing you how not to. And, to not be
entirely negative, the occasional model of clarity. With special
blogging consultant, Brad DeLong.


The Forgotten Sidekick
======================

December 11, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/forgottensidekick)

* * * * *

It’s been a frustrating year for us Sidekick users. It seems like every
television show, periodical, and man in the street is raving about the
amazing world-changing capabilities of the iPhone (and, to a lesser
extent, the Google Phone). How having a device that can conveniently
surf the Web, answer email, run third-party applications and fit in your
pocket is [as big a technological breakthrough as
hovercars](http://daringfireball.net/2008/10/iphone_3g).

Which is infuriating to those of us who have been using a superior
device for the past five years.

From the very first demo of the iPhone, it was obvious it was a knockoff
of the Sidekick. The UI demo Steve Jobs did — calling two people and
then merging the calls — is the exact same demo I’d given to all my
friends to show off the incredible UI polish and attention to detail by
the Sidekick developers. Sure, there were some differences — most
notably that Apple’s artists had prettied up the iPhone UI as compared
to the 8-bit basement wackos who drew up the Sidekick’s — but it was
clear that this was an evolutionary change, not the revolutionary leap
everyone made it out to be.

And, when I bought an iPhone, it became clear it wasn’t even an
improvement. The touch-keyboard made it impossible to type anything at
length (I regularly composed whole articles on my Sidekick), the lack of
multitasking made it impossible to queue up articles in the Web browser
and read them on the subway (I read several books on the Sidekick),
instant messages weren’t even supported, and the swipe-to-scroll method
quickly grew tiresome. Within a couple weeks, I sold the phone to a
friend (although not before getting an outrageous roaming bill from AT&T
because the iPhone couldn’t keep its mouth shut).

For those two weeks, though, I was repeatedly stopped and gawked at by
well-dressed people in airports and trains. They all wanted to know “Is
that the iPhone?” and “How is it?” By contrast, those people, when they
saw me using the Sidekick, assumed it was a videogame device.

But it wasn’t as if the Sidekick was unheard of. As soon as I wandered
out of the land of white folks in suits-and-ties, black and latino kids
would rush up to me and gab about the Sidekick. During one trip, a
latina middle-schooler stopped me on the sidewalk and asked if I’d
gotten the latest firmware update yet. “It has JavaScript support!” she
enthused. Browsing the Sidekick user forums bore this out — it was all
black and latino schoolchildren.

But, of course, neither minorities nor schoolchildren rule the world, so
the Sidekick has been written out of history. 2007 was the first time
anyone had thought to give a smartphone a decent UI, or a web browser,
or an over-the-air application store. Well, at least it was the first
time anyone thought to tell white people.


Bubble City: Chapter 12
=======================

December 29, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity12)

* * * * *

[part of *Bubble City*](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity)

“Hello?” asked the woman at the reception desk. The lobby was filled
with colorful baubles — lava lamps and bouncy balls, comfy sofas and
computer terminals, and a minifridge stocked with a wide variety of
Odwalla beverages. The whole thing was calibrated perfectly to seem
somehow relaxed yet ostentatious at the same time.

“Hello?” the receptionist asked again, a little less patient this time.
She was an attractive woman, Wayne thought — mid-twenties, straight
brown hair, thick-rimmed glasses perched atop a prominent nose — he
struggled to focus. “Uh, yes, hello there,” he finally said.

“What brings you to Google today?” she asked.

“Oh, uh, I’m here to see—I mean, I guess—I have a meeting.”

She stared a bit, then nodded. “I see. Can I ask with whom?”

“Samuel Boxton. He’s expecting me.”

“Of course. And your name?”

“Wayne Darnus.”

“Thanks, Wayne. It’ll just be a moment while I ring him. In the mean
time, can you sign in on this computer?” She pointed to a terminal on
top of the desk before tapping a few keys, apparently connecting the
hands-free headset she was already wearing.

The terminal asked for his name, employer, host, and signature (for the
mandatory non-disclosure agreement, of course), before printing out a
badge he was encouraged to affix to his chest, marking him as an
interloper.

“Yes, Mr. Darnus here to see you,” the receptionist was saying. “42
Lobby. Of course.” She turned to Wayne. “He’ll just be a minute — please
take a seat.”

On the coffee table were the various usual industry magazines, which
Wayne thumbed through nervously before putting them back down. He
scanned the walls, which were covered in various plaques and puff pieces
and commendations. He begun to feel very small and felt his heart beat a
little more quickly. Why did a place designed to seem so friendly
actually seem to make him feel scared?

Wayne’s eyes made several more circuits around the room and through the
magazines before Samuel suddenly arrived, bright and cheerful as
anything. “Wayne! Good to see you!” he exclaimed.

Wayne jumped up, extending an arm. But Samuel went in for a full embrace
— not something Wayne was used to; usually the situation was reversed.

“Look,” Samuel said, “right this way.” Samuel led him out of the lobby
and into the courtyard. They went past the endless swimming pool and the
volleyball court, the dinosaur skeleton and model rocketship — all
glinting in the sun. As they went further, the buildings became more
bland and boxy, across parking lots and service ways and sidestreets,
parts of the sprawling Google campus normal visitors rarely saw.

They entered another building through a backdoor, Samuel swiping his
keycard to get in. After that came a maze of twisty little passageways,
with little in the way of signage to help distinguish between them. They
came to a series of metal doors labeled “AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY”
which this time required a palm-print. Finally, they reached a
conference room labeled 10\^2 - e\^iπ.

“Take a seat,” Samuel offered.

Wayne did, grabbing a seat and the end of a long conference table.
Samuel grabbed one around the corner from him, a large projector filling
the wall at his back.

“So, Wayne, I understand you have some concerns,” he offered. “Can we
talk about them?”

“Concerns?” Wayne said nervously. “Oh, no — I’m not sure what you mean.”

“Really? Nothing’s been bothering you? Here’s your chance to have it out
with the big guys — we here at Google are all ears!”

“No, really, I think Google’s been doing a great job.”

“Look, Wayne,” Samuel said, sliding a mouse and keyboard in front of
him. “With a couple of taps here, I can get you any Google employee you
want. Is there really nothing at all you have to say to them?” Samuel
was looking Wayne straight in the eye.

“Uh, hmm, well, it’s a very generous offer you have there, but, uh — I
really just can’t think of anything right now. Uh, heh, if only you’d
given me time to prepare! A-heh-heh. I’m sure I could have thought of
plenty of things!”

“I’m really sorry to hear you say that, Wayne. Because a funny thing
happened this morning. I was just doing some regular user analysis on
our Google Videocast software — nothing out of the ordinary, of course —
and I just happened to come across this little clip.”

Samuel tapped a few keys and there, in full-screen video, was Wayne, his
head filling the whole back wall, then repeated in miniature on various
screens across the room. Wayne recognized the video and his stomach
began to sink:

> I know I’ve been a supporter of Google in the past. But I think
> they’ve finally crossed the line.
>
> I’ve recently received information that they are chasing and
> persecuting a young kid just beca—

Wayne slunk into his seat.

“Now, I hope you understand my predicament, Wayne,” Samuel said. “As
part of Google Evangelism, it’s my job to ensure that the world thinks
only the best of Google. That they see all the good things we’re doing
for the world. That they see all the progress we’re inspiring.”

“Because of Google products, billions of dollars have been added to the
global economy, people are sharing and communicating more than ever
before, kids in Africa now get a chance to read every book in the
libraries of Harvard.” Samuel looked wistful. “It’s really some amazing
stuff. And I’m proud just to be a part of it.”

“Which is why I can’t let you jeopardize all that,” he said, turning
serious. “Especially not by repeating some crazy story I told you over
drinks. No, there’s just too much at stake.”

“Look, I’m a good person. Here at Google we’re all good people. *Don’t
be evil* is our motto, for goodness’ sake. But doing what’s good isn’t
the same as doing what’s easy. Sometimes making the right decisions
requires doing things that are really very hard. An this is one of those
situations.”

“We all love you here at Google, Wayne. And we’ve always been eager to
support you — surely you know that more than anyone. But I think we’ve
reached a point in our relationship where it might be best to keep you a
little closer.” Samuel smiled.

“Closer?” Wayne said, finally. “What do you mean?”

Samuel reached underneath the desk for something. “Why don’t you wait
right here a minute and we’ll show you. Just a sec!” Then he got up and
walked down the hall and thru the large metal doors, leaving Wayne and
his visitors’ badge behind him.

* * * * *

Trent felt the wind riffling through his hair, the top down on his BMW
328i. He was heading north, past the San Francisco traffic, across he
beauty of the Golden Gate Bridge, through the gorgeous hills and valleys
of Marin, to the spacious beauty of Napa.

The life of a technology executive was stressful, which is why these
work-related getaways were so important. It seemed like every month
there was some kind of executive retreat up here — a place where the
Important Men of Business could get away from it all, loosen their ties,
and swap stories in the golden California sun.

They were roughin’ it.

He parked his car on the gravel, before heading to the courtyard where a
suited caterer was pouring drinks. “Whiskey sour,” he ordered, before
looking for somewhere to mingle.

“Hey, Trent! It’s so good to see you.” A man he didn’t quite recognize
grabbed him by the shoulder. “Thank you *so* much for coming — it’s a
real treat to have you.”

“Of course, of course!” Trent replied. “How could I resist another
chance to visit a beautiful place like this?” He gestured around him.

“Well, just make yourself at home. We’ve got some time to chat until six
and then we’ll all be heading into town for dinner.”

“I can’t wait.”

The fellow, who was apparently the host, smiled and headed off in search
of other people to welcome.

“Don, from Google,” someone said, extending a hand.

“Trent, from Newsflip,” Trent replied.

“Ahh, Newsflip — I’ve heard a lot of good things about you,” Don said.

“Oh, well, I’m very glad to hear that. We always look up to our friends
down in the Valley.”

“Actually,” Don said, “I’m not going to be down there for long. I just
got word that I’m going to be one of the lucky few who can transition to
our upcoming San Francisco office.”

“Really? Well, congratulations!”

“Thank you. You know, actually, we have an interesting meeting coming up
on NNA-related issues at Google Mountain View. You really should
attend.”

“Oh, fascinating. I’ll definitely send a programmer or two.”

“No, this is a very high-level summit. Just CEOs and above. Obviously
the top people from our side will be there as well.”

“Interesting,” Trent said. He was always a sucker for networking. “I’d
love to come.”

“Fantastic — I’ll call your assistant and be sure to get it set up.
There’s just one thing I should warn you about, though.”

“Oh, really? What’s that?”

“After you visit us at Google, you may never want to leave!”

They both laughed, although Don rather harder.

Trent scanned the courtyard for other people he should speak to, but
nobody seemed particularly appealing. He decided to sneak into a group
standing by the corner, laughing wildly.

“That’s a great idea,” someone was saying. “In fact, maybe we should
hold all our meetings at strip clubs from now on.”

“Well, you know what I say,” another man added. “If they can’t hold
their liquor, how can you expect them to hold a job?”

Trent just smiled and nodded.


2008 Review of Books
====================

January 3, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2008books)

* * * * *

*Previously:* [2007 Review of
Books](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2007), [Books I recommend
Without Reservation: 2006](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)

I read exactly 100 books this year. I mistakenly told someone over the
summer that I read a hundred books a year (I only read 70 last year,
although 120 the year before that) and as the new year approached I felt
duty-bound to make that true. (This led to spending a lot of New Year’s
Eve in a corner reading, as this list may suggest.)

Here are the books (in chronological order), with occasional short
comments. Books I’m happy to have read are linked. Books I recommend are
in bold.

1.  *[Quantum Theory: A Very Short
    Introduction](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0192802526)*. Seemed
    decent for the format.
2.  Gecan, *[Going Public](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1400076498)*
3.  *[The Activist’s Handbook](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0520229282)*.
    Could be better written, but probably the best of its type. I’ve
    definitely thought back to this one a lot this year.
4.  Poundstone, *[How Would You Move Mount
    Fuji?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316778494)*
5.  Poundstone, *[Labyrinths of
    Reason](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0385242719)*
6.  Lodge, ***[Changing
    Places](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140170987)***.

    Typical campus novel fun, but with some great People’s Park stories.

7.  Elster, *[Political
    Psychology](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521422868)*. Short Elster
    essay collection. Probably for Elster fans only.

8.  *[Lords of Poverty](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0871134691)*
    (skipped parts)
9.  *On Being Nonprofit*. Completely unmemorable.
10. *How to Do Things with Words*. Important in its time, but mostly
    overtaken by Searle’s later work.
11. *The Revolution Will Not Be Televised*
12. *Campaign Finance Reform and the Future of the Democratic Party*
13. ***[The Visible Hand](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0674940520)*.**

    Tough sledding, but important points. [Read my
    summary](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visiblehand).

14. Thaler, *[The Winner’s
    Curse](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691019347)*

15. Poundstone, ***[Fortune’s
    Formula](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0809045990)***

    Fantastic fun. Math, mafiosi, movies.

16. Freeman, *[Rawls](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0415301084)* (parts)

17. MacKenzie, *[An Engine Not a
    Camera](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262633671)*.

    I recommend [starting with his *LRB*
    stuff](http://delicious.com/aaronsw/donaldmackenzie).

18. Fitch, *[Solidarity for
    Sale](http://books.theinfo.org/go/189162072X)*. For leftists who
    really love unions. You need to know the flaws to make them better.

19. Maisel, *[From Obscurity to Oblivion: Running in the Congressional
    Primary](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0870493477)*. Not a lot of
    books on the inside of campaigns, but this is one of the few.
20. Segaran, *[Programming Collective
    Intelligence](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0596529325)*. Terrible
    title, but a good book on how to do data mining.
21. Willis, *[Learning to
    Labor](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0231053576)*. Not as great as the
    excerpts I’d read had led me to think.
22. *[The Brain: A Very Short
    Introduction](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0192853929)*
23. Peck, *[Hatchet Jobs](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1595580271)*. Fun
    stuff.
24. Sloan, *My Years with General Motors* (skipped second half). I read
    this to understand how modern management was invented. It did not
    help.
25. Hoopes, ***[False
    Prophets](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0738207985)***

    A wonderful series of profiles of the most prominent management
    theorists going back to slavery and Taylor. The book’s editorial
    line is a bit marred by the inability of the author (a B-School prof
    and manager) to reconcile his belief that management power is unjust
    and that it is necessary. But solid history and good takedowns of
    some important figures.

26. Dani Rodrik, *[Has Globalization Gone Too
    Far?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0881322415)* (lent by Henry
    Farrell). A good book, but not for general readers.

27. *A Random Walk Down Wall Street*. Mixed feelings.
28. Wilson, ***[To The Finland
    Station](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1590170334)*.**

    Really, really good. Edmund Wilson was the incredible writer you’d
    expect and this is his masterpiece.

29. Maurer, ***[The Big Con: The Story of the Confidence
    Man](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0385495382)***

    [Luc Sante’s intro](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/447) alone is
    worth the price of the book, but the rest of the book is fantastic
    as well. Everyone should know about con men. (The BBC’s *Hustle* is
    obviously a television adaptation of the book.)

30. *A Choice Not an Echo: The Inside Story of How American Presidents
    Are Chosen*. Still crazy after all these years, although the whole
    anti-backroom thing is interesting. I read it to see what you could
    airdrop on college kids.

31. Khurana, ***[Searching for a Corporate
    Savior](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691120390)***

    Really, truly great.

32. *Is That a Politician in Your Pocket?* (skimmed)

33. *[Debunking Economics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1856499928)*.
    Quite good, although not perfect.
34. *Men and Women of the Corporation*.
35. Carlson, *Executive Behavior*. Worthless
36. Elster, ***[Explaining Social
    Behavior](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521777445)***

    Magical, magisterial masterpiece. ([my
    review](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toolbox); [more on
    Elster](http://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Aaaronsw.com%20elster))

37. Piven, *Challenging Authority*. Kind of thin; I glazed over
    portions.

38. Rosen, *[The World Split
    Open](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140097198)*
39. Mary Douglas, *How Institutions Think*. Terrible.
40. *[From the Folks Who Brought You the
    Weekend](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1565847768)*
41. *Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences*
42. Brook, *[The Trap](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088016)*
43. Gessen, *[All the Sad Young Literary
    Men](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0670018554)*
44. Khurana, *From Higher Aims to Hired Hands*
45. Glymour, *[The Mind’s
    Arrows](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262072203)*
46. Pearl, *[Causality](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521773628)*. I wish
    everyone understood this.
47. Elster, *[Strong Feelings](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262550369)*
48. Gelman et. al., *[Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor
    State](http://redbluerichpoor.com/)* (sent by Andrew Gelman). Lots
    of great empirical work, but little theory or story to back it up.
49. Lodge, ***[Nice Work](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140133968)***

    Typical campus novel fun, but with deeper thoughts about business
    and finance.

50. Armstrong and Moulitsas, *[Crashing the
    Gate](http://books.theinfo.org/go/193339241X)*

51. Menand, *[American Studies](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0374529000)*
52. Galbraith, ***[The Predator
    State](http://books.theinfo.org/go/141656683X)***

    [My summary](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/predatorstate).

53. ***[Watchmen](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1401219268)***

    Brilliant. Wanted to see it before the movie came out.

54. Tilly, *Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Comparisons*

55. Mann, *[Sources of Social Power, Vol.
    1](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B000PS4V0W)*

    Tough reading, but really fascinating stuff.

56. Frank, *[The Wrecking
    Crew](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805079882)*. Lots of good dirt,
    but not exactly the most rigorous theoretical argument.

57. Perry, *[Spectrum](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1844671356)*. Perry
    is great — the autoinvestigatorial last chapter alone is worth it.
58. Bearman et. al.,
    *[Doormen](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0226039692)*. I read this
    because I now have a doorman and am uncomfortable about it. This
    helped.
59. Teles, *[Rise of the Conservative Legal
    Movement](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691122083)*. Good stuff,
    although narrow.
60. DFW, *[McCain’s Promise](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316040533)*.
    Brilliant, naturally. I’d read *Up, Simba!* before, of course, but I
    read this out loud to a friend and it was just a joy to do.
61. Ken Silverstein,
    *[Turkmeniscam](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140006743X)*.

    Great fun. Not just a great story of investigative journalism, but
    lots of interesting and important background as well. I’m a huge
    Silverstein fan.

62. **DFW**, *[Everything and
    More](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393326292)*.

    This book is an interesting, but, I think, ultimately unsuccessful
    experiment. DFW tries to teach math by channelling his favorite math
    teacher — writing in the style of an excitable lecturer, completely
    with verbal tics and backtracking (which, in printed form, becomes
    kind of a running gag).

    It’s certainly not a bad book by any means, but I don’t think it’s
    really a successful model for how books can teach math.

63. Wodehouse, *[Psmith in the
    City](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1585674788)*. Hilarious. Psmith is
    a delight. I want to hear him acted but the recent BBC version is
    dreadful.

64. Clark, *[Organizing Our Marvellous Neighbours](http://en-ca.org/)*
    (skimmed parts)
65. *[How Wikipedia Works](http://howwikipediaworks.com/)* (skimmed
    parts)
66. Latour and Woolgar, *[Laboratory
    Life](http://books.theinfo.org/go/069102832X)*. Delightful. I
    apologize humbly and abjectly for ever criticizing the strong
    programme of science. Sokal and Bricmont led me badly astray on that
    one.
67. DFW, *[Consider the
    Lobster](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316013323)*

    DFW’s suicide hit me very hard. I ended up coping [by reading every
    piece of nonfiction he’d ever
    published](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/David_Foster_Wallace_nonfiction).
    He was a brilliant, tortured man and I see so much of myself in him.
    His nonfiction was fantastic and I will consider my life a success
    if I can do half of what he did.

    If you want to get started, I recommend (best work first):

    1.  [Federer as Religious
        Experience](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/20/sports/playmagazine/20federer.html?pagewanted=print)
        [[B/W
        PDF](http://www.theknowe.net/dfwfiles/pdfs/Wallace-Federer_as_Religious_Experience.pdf)]
    2.  “David Lynch Keeps His Head”, in *A Supposedly Fun Thing I’ll
        Never Do Again* (there’s a *severely* abbreviated version
        printed in *Premiere*; read the real thing instead)
    3.  “A Supposedly Fun Thing I’ll Never Do Again”, in *A Supposedly
        Fun Thing I’ll Never Do Again* (the [*Harper’s*
        version](http://harpers.org/archive/1996/01/0007859)
        [[PDF](http://www.harpers.org/media/pdf/dfw/HarpersMagazine-1996-01-0007859.pdf)]
        preserves most of the good stuff but is shorter)

68. Krugman, ***[Peddling
    Prosperity](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393312925)***

    Probably Krugman’s best book, it provides a throughly enjoyable and
    enlightening *intellectual* overview of the economics of the 1980s
    and 1990s. The delicious takedown of supplysiders is worth the book
    alone, but the rest is great too.

69. Tough, *[Whatever It
    Takes](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618569898)*. A great read; a bit
    overly credulous — doesn’t address Keynesian critics of intervention
    or betray much skepticism about tests. ([my
    review](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whateverittakes))

70. Wolfe, *[Radical Chic and Mau-Mauing the Flak
    Catchers](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0553380621)*. Great fun.
71. *[The Homework Myth](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0738211117)*.
    Sometimes it seems like Kohn just gets narrower and narrower (via
    email, he disputes this).
72. *[Savage Mules](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1844672654)*. A good
    antidote for faith in the Democratic Party. ([dsquared’s
    review](http://crookedtimber.org/2008/07/22/book-review-savage-mules))
73. Beam, *[Great Idea at the
    Time](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586484877)*. A fun historical
    take down of the Great Books. Probably more fun if you know what the
    Great Books are.
74. *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*. Borderline unreadable. Why did
    everyone rave about this book?
75. ***[Love at Goon Park](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0425194051)***.

    The first section is a (confessed!) retread of *[Becoming
    Attached](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015)*, one of my very
    favorite books ([a 2006
    highlight](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)). But after that
    it gets much better and the interplay of animal and human stories is
    a lot of fun. I’ve been reading it to the five-year-old, who loves
    animal stories of all sorts, and she just laps it up. (I skip the
    incredibly dark parts, of course.)

76. Newsweek, *[Secrets of the 2008
    Campaign](http://www.newsweek.com/id/167581)* (full text online).
    For campaign junkies only.

77. Perlstein, *[Tested](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088024)*.

    Very good. ([my
    review](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kindergartenkafka))

78. Keynes, *[Economic Consequences of the
    Peace](http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/15776) (full text online)*.

    Wow, Keynes knows how to write. The first section is a must-read for
    any diplomat. Chapters 4 and 5 (which unfortunately are the bulk of
    the book) are only worth skipping or skimming for modern readers.

79. Kaufman, *Synecdoche, New York* (scripts). What a movie! There were
    a lot of script reviews that said things along the lines of “I don’t
    know if movies can capture a script this complex.” Reading the
    script now, you see the exact opposite is the case. The script is a
    pale imitation of the film, missing most of what made the film
    magical. Which just underscores what a great movie it was.

80. Bowles and Gintis, *[Schooling in Capitalist
    America](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0465097189)*.

    Not the easiest read, but brilliant. One of the very very few books
    I want to read again (in this case, because I am sure I didn’t get
    it all the first time). The definitive Marxist take on education.

81. *[Smile When You’re Lying](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805082093)*

    Tons of fun. I hate traveling and have never cracked a travel book,
    but this angry and profane insider’s evisceration of the industry
    was still a complete joy. [Read Ezra’s
    review](http://www.prospect.org/csnc/blogs/ezraklein_archive?month=11&year=2008&base_name=baked_alaska)
    — with [a comment from the
    author](http://www.prospect.org/csnc/blogs/ezraklein_archive?month=11&year=2008&base_name=baked_alaska#comment-6236833)!.

82. DFW, *[A Supposedly Fun Thing I’ll Never Do
    Again](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316925284)*.

    Brilliant. Just brilliant.

83. Keynes, *Essays in Persuasion*.

84. Douthat, *Privilege* (lent by Rick Perlstein).

    What is wrong with Ross Douthat? This book is eminently mockable,
    but I have to say I could see writing most of it myself. Which is
    weird, since Douthat is a staunch conservative and I’m a
    crazy-far-leftist. Is Douthat a double-agent? Or is he really this
    confused about what conservatism is about? I wrote this summary for
    Rick:

    -   Prologue: Harvard is actually an education in the ruling class.
        [Ross didn’t like Harvard so much.]

    -   1: Diversity policies ensure all sorts of ethnicities get
        accepted but they all come from the upper class. [Big black
        homeless guy starts living in Ross’s dorm.]

    -   2: The real ruling class gets tapped for private clubs where
        they get connected to wealthy alumni and rape attractive coeds.
        [Ross gets invited to apply at various clubs and rejected.]

    -   3: Students are aggressive social climbers, calibrating who they
        talk to and what activities they join to maximize their resume.
        [Ross’s friend’s friend gets arrested for embezzling.]

    -   4: Persuaded that the market is God and academia is a sideshow,
        professors give students easy grades to help them get good jobs
        and be rich (thus proving the professors’ worth). Courses are
        poorly taught and maddeningly specific — its very difficult to
        get a solid general education. [Ross doesn’t like his classes
        and gets mediocre grades.]

    -   5: Random drunken hookups are so common that the only way to get
        any kind of commitment is to fall into a college marriage (of
        which, I must say, there is a beautiful description pp.
        145-147). [Ross falls head-over-heels for a totally agonizing
        tease, only to have her give it up months later to a preppy
        sailing kid who gets her drunk.]

    -   6: Most harvard students arrive virgins and have a hards time
        getting any while they’re there, out of awkwardness and fear of
        threatening their spot in the overclass. [Ross can’t even get
        laid at an all-girls school.]

    -   7: The student body is primarily New Democrat, with a smattering
        of vocal leftist protestors. [Ross supports the living wage
        movement. [*ed. note:* wtf?]]

    -   8: Harvard students spend summers at elite internships
        acclimating to their future careers. [Ross goes sailing with
        William F. Buckley!]

    -   9: 9/11 sucked. [Ross laps up the patriotic spirit and the
        Summers presidency.]

    -   …and then a tearfelt ending.

    Sorry, did I end up mocking it a little?

85. Gore, *[Sammy’s Hill](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1401360297)*. Yes,
    I have a weakness for chick lit.

86. *[What Motivates
    Bureaucrats?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0231106971)* A genuine
    investigation (as opposed to the typical social science arms-length
    thinking) into how Reagan affected the civil service. In short, our
    civil service is the opposite of what you see on *Yes, Minister* —
    they were practically falling over themselves to kneecap their own
    agency in response to the President. Kind of sad, but hopefully this
    means that Obama will also have wide lattitude.
87. DFW and Mark Costello, *[Signifying
    Rappers](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0880015357)*.

    A great book, although surprisingly the best parts are written by
    Costello. A dense intermixed weave of music, history, race, law,
    fantasia, and brilliant writing.

88. *[The Telephone Gambit](http://books.theinfo.org/go/039333368X)*.
    Decently researched, mixed in with self-indulgent (and just plain
    bad) autobiography about writing the book. I wrote up a summary of
    the story which I’ll be publishing soon and you should probably just
    read that instead. But everybody should agree that Bell stole the
    telephone from Gray after this book.

89. Krugman, *The Age of Diminished Expectations* (1st ed). Bleh.
    Krugman’s first book, back before he knew how to write.
90. Bartels, *[Unequal
    Democracy](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691136637)*. I’m also going
    to publish a summary of this.
91. Beam, *Gracefully Insane*. Like all good residents of Cambridge,
    being institutionalized in McLean has long been a dream. After
    enjoying Beam’s other book (*Great Idea at the Time*) this seemed
    right up my alley, but it was nowhere near as good.
92. Gore, *[Sammy’s House](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1401309496)*. The
    Gore books were bothering me because I could never figure out who
    Wye and RG were supposed to be — all the other characters mapped
    pretty obviously onto current politicians, but the candidates were a
    mystery. I’d somehow forgotten my first instinct: RG is AG, which
    means that you have to think back two decades or so. Once you
    realize that, everything falls into place.
93. Wodehouse, *Mike: A Public School Story*. The first Psmith story.
    Cricket, cricket, cricket, cricket. Sigh.
94. *[Ice Cream Man](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B000JLTS8U)*. Good fun
    for Tosci’s fans.
95. Kuttner, *[Obama’s
    Challenge](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1603580794)*
96. *V for Vendetta*. Moore’s whole story about how the movie softened
    the fascism and anarchism seems completely bogus. That said, the
    movie did change some fantastic parts, including V’s televised
    speech and the brilliantly convoluted *Hamlet*-esque ending. Also,
    the movie’s whole virus attack subplot was stupid. On the other
    hand, the movie added some great stuff too. So see both, I guess.
97. Krugman, *Pop Internationalism*. The essays Krugman wrote before
    *Peddling Prosperity*, meaning it discusses the same stuff but much
    more disjointed and poorly edited. I was hoping it’d explain the
    mystery of his animus towards Laura D’A, but no such luck.
98. *[First-Time Manager](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0814408214)*. A
    much better book than I expected, but enough tin-ear corporate
    silliness that I can’t thoroughly recommend it.
99. Searle, **[*The Campus
    War*](http://www.ditext.com/searle/campus/campus.html)** (full text
    online).

    Actually, a really good book on the campus uprisings of the 1960s.
    First, there’s some terrific first-hand reporting from Searle’s
    experience at Berkeley (in which he participated in all three sides:
    the uprising, the faculty response, and the administration
    counterattack!). Second, there’s some good secondhand summarizing
    about the experience at other campuses. Third, there’s some good
    analysis about why campus uprisings happen and what they mean.
    Fourth, there are some interesting proposals for reforming the
    university. (I, too, want to get rid of the trustee system.) Makes
    me wish Searle did more non-philosophy books!

100. Haggis-on-Whey, *Animals of the Ocean (In Particular, the Giant
    Squid)*. Not as good as [the
    original](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1932416978) (now in its third
    edition!).

Happy new year!


The True Story of the Telephone
===============================

January 5, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/truetelephone)

* * * * *

*I grew up in Highland Park, Illinois, just down the street from where
the telephone was invented. I now live in Cambridge, Massachusetts, just
down the street from where it was stolen. Seth Shulman’s recent book*
[The Telephone Gambit](http://books.theinfo.org/go/039333368X) *lays out
the clearest case yet of how it all happened. Here’s the summary:*

Alexander Graham Bell (or Aleck Bell, as he was then called) was the son
of Alexander Melville Bell, the inventor of a system of phonic notation
called Visible Speech. The elder Bell would use Aleck as an assistant in
his demonstrations: After sending Aleck to wait in another room, Mr.
Bell would ask the audience for a word or strange noise then write it in
Visible Speech. Aleck would return and reproduce the sound from the
writing alone. Voila.

As a child growing up like this, he played at inventing machines that
could talk and telegraphs that could listen. But he found his career in
tutoring the deaf — by teaching them to pronounce the phonemes of
Visible Speech, he eventually succeeded in teaching them to talk and
read lips.

One of his students was Mabel Hubbard, daughter of prominent Boston
lawyer Gardiner Greene Hubbard. Son of a Massachusetts Supreme Court
Justice, Hubbard established water and gas and trolley utilities for
Cambridge, Mass. — some of the first in the nation. He also fervently
lobbied Congress to replace Western Union’s monopoly on the telegraph
with a new corporation, the US Postal Telegraph Company, that would
contract with the government Post Office.

At the time, telegraph wires blanketed the skies of Boston, hanging in a
dense web above the buildings. Many desperately wished for someone to
develop a telegraph that could send multiple messages over the same
wire, so that many wires could be replaced with just one. The theory was
that if one could transmit the messages using different tones, they
would “harmonize” instead of interfere, leading the idea to be called
the “harmonic telegraph”. Naturally, Alexander Graham Bell turned his
tinkering to this problem and persuaded Hubbard (as well as Thomas
Sanders, another father of a Bell student) to finance his research in
exchange for a share of any future US profits. Further complicating
matters, Bell had fallen in love with his student, Mabel Hubbard. Mr.
Hubbard made it clear he did not approve of such a marriage unless Bell
made a profitable discovery.

But Bell was simply a hobbyist, the real research was being done by a
man named Elisha Gray. Gray ran Western Electric, the leading supplier
of technical expertise to telegraph monopoly Western Union. From his lab
in Highland Park, Illinois, he and his assistants worked feverishly at
new discoveries. Bell was well aware of this and considered himself to
be in a race with Gray to invent the harmonic telegraph first.

In 1875, Bell made a breakthrough in his work on the harmonic telegraph.
But he was a crafty fellow — his deal with Gardiner and Sanders was only
about splitting *US* profits; it said nothing about profits overseas.
British law at the time granted patents only to inventions not patented
elsewhere first, so Bell drew up several copies of his harmonic
telegraph patent and sent some to be filed in Britain first. The rest
were sent to DC to be filed as soon as word got back from Britain.

On February 14, 1876, while the lawyers were waiting in DC to file
Bell’s patent, Gray filed a patent of his own. Bell’s lawyers were close
to the patent officers and had asked to be tipped off if Gray tried to
file something, so they could file Bell’s patent first. When Gray’s
patent was placed in the patent office’s inbox, Bell’s lawyers
hand-delivered Bell’s patent to the examiner, so they could claim he’d
received Bell’s first.

The patent examiner, Zenas Fisk Wilber, had fought in the civil war with
Bell’s attorney, Marcellus Bailey. Wilber was an alcoholic and owed
Bailey money (a serious Patent Office ethics violation). To pay his
friend back, he showed him Gray’s application. Bailey was startled to
find it wasn’t a patent on a harmonic telegraph at all — it was a patent
for a telephone, capable of transmitting all the sounds of human speech
and music. He called for Bell to come to DC at once.

Bell did, and examiner Wilber showed him Gray’s patent as well, taking
time to explain how it worked. Bell thanked him and returned that
afternoon with \$100 for his trouble. Bell then quickly scribbled an
addition to his patent in the margin, adding that it should also cover
“transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically” (this addition does
not appear in any of the other copies).

Contravening much standard practice at the time, Bell’s (modified)
patent was quickly granted, while Gray’s was denied. It was issued the
same day Bell returned home from DC, March 7, 1876. The following day,
Bell drew in his lab notebook a copy of the diagram he had seen in
Elisha Gray’s patent:

![Diagram showing the similarity between Gray's patent and Bell's
notebook](image1_truetelephone)

It took Bell several days of tinkering, but soon he was able to
replicate Gray’s device. On March 10, he made that now-famous call:
“Watson — come here — I want to see you.” Both Bell and his assistant
Watson recorded the event that night in their notebooks.

But Bell didn’t want to simply duplicate Gray’s work; he wanted to
invent a telephone of his own. He spent many months trying to develop a
telephone that worked on a different principle, but never succeeded in
getting it to clearly transmit audible speech. Bell was always
extraordinarily reluctant to demonstrate his telephone, for fear that
Gray would learn it was a simple copy. Mabel had to trick him into
attending the Centennial Exposition, where he was supposed to
demonstrate his work to a group of engineers, including Elisha Gray. On
one occasion, Bell’s telephone patent was set to be annulled unless Bell
would swear under oath that the invention was truly his. Bell fled the
country, testifying only at the last minute after desperate pleading
from Mabel.

The legal conniving a success, Bell and Mabel were soon married. Feeling
guilty, Bell gave all but ten of his shares in the Bell Telephone
Company to her and swore to never work in telephony again. The company
was operated by Gardiner and others while Bell went back to working with
the deaf. He always said he was more proud of his work for the deaf than
of the telephone.

It took Gray a long time to realize that Bell’s patent was a fraud. For
one thing, he was still focused on the harmonic telegraph; his customers
at Western Union couldn’t imagine running telephone wires to every house
and thus couldn’t see how talking over wires was particularly useful.
For another, it took years for the story to leak out, through numerous
court battles and Congressional hearings. [Zenas Fisk Wilber’s
affidavit](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c8/Zenas-fisk-wilber-affidavit.png)
confessing to what he’d done did not appear until 1886, a decade later.
Bell’s notebooks, making clear the blatant copy, were not made public
until the *1990s*.

Bell’s biographers have gone to heroic lengths to explain away all the
evidence. Refusing credit for the telephone just showed Bell’s humility;
not being involved in the corporation showed his dedication to pure
research. The fact that both patents were filed on the same day is a
grand historic coincidence — or perhaps *Gray* stole the idea from Bell.

As a result, Gray is forgotten and Bell is remembered as one of
history’s great inventors — not as he should be: a hobbyist and a fraud,
forced by love into stealing one of the greatest inventions of all time.

*Now playing: Regina Spector - “On The Radio”*

[image1_truetelephone]: image1_truetelephone.jpg

Felten for CTO?
===============

January 8, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/feltencto)

* * * * *

[[crossposted to Open
Left](http://www.openleft.com/showDiary.do?diaryId=10784)]

As inauguration approaches, speculation has been heating up about
Obama’s pick for the newly-created position of CTO. Most of the names
floated — Eric Schmidt, Steve Ballmer, Jeff Bezos — just seem ridiculous
(would you really leave being CEO of Google, Microsoft, or Amazon for a
White House job?), but I’ve recently heard one name that’s gotten me
excited: Princeton’s [Ed Felten](http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~felten/)
([blog](http://www.freedom-to-tinker.com/blog/felten)).

Felten came to national prominence in 2000, when the music industry held
a contest to see if anyone could break their “digital watermarking”
technology. Felten and his team broke it and was about to publish a
paper explaining how, when the recording industry threatened to sue him
if he did.

Since then, he’s offered expert opinions on everything from Microsoft to
voting machines and started the Center for Information Technology Policy
at Princeton, which he directs, where he’s pushed for more government
transparency. He has the incredibly rare combination of being an
absolutely first-rate technologist while also being able to clearly
explain all of the relevant policy implications. Like [Science Advisor
John Holdren](http://www.openleft.com/showDiary.do?diaryId=10525), he’ll
do a fantastic job representing the consensus of technical experts on
[every policy
issue](http://www.freedom-to-tinker.com/blog/felten/predictions-2009)
that comes his way.


Why are online ads cheaper?
===========================

January 12, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/onlineadprices)

* * * * *

It seems lately, what with the [End
Times](http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/print/200901/new-york-times) and
all, people have been asking why newspapers can’t make money online.
Obviously online papers don’t have circulation fees (subscriptions and
newsstand prices) but they don’t have circulation costs either (paper,
ink, delivery). Circulation fees only make up 20% of newspaper revenue,
so all things considered one wouldn’t think this would be an existential
threat to the business.

Craigslist has been a bigger deal; classified ads used to be 40% of
newspaper revenue, versus just 30% now. But even magazines, which have
never run classifieds, are feeling the pinch.

The real issue is that online ad prices per reader are far, far lower
than offline prices. But why is that?

I’ve heard lots of theories, but I think the real explanation is simple:
supply and demand. If you want to buy an offline ad, there are only a
handful of places you can buy it. As a result, supply is constrained and
the price goes up. But online, ad networks let just about everybody sell
ads on an equal footing. Practically, it doesn’t make that much
difference whether your ad appears on nytimes.com or politico.com or
eschatonblog.com, as long as it reaches the same person. So supply goes
up and the price gets bid down.

Most people don’t seem to like this explanation, so I’ll try phrasing it
another way. In the days of paper, to get your ad to people you had to
get it on a truck and into their hands on something they would read.
Newspapers and magazines could charge a premium for this. Online, you
just need to upload an image file.

Anyone see any flaws with this theory?


Cass Sunstein, Concern Troll
============================

January 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/casskills)

* * * * *

[[cross-posted to Open
Left](http://www.openleft.com/showDiary.do?diaryId=10955)]

Remember when President Bush tried to put more arsenic in our drinking
water? Lots of people got outraged — it seemed like a classic example of
a deregulator-in-chief helping his corporate friends at our expense. Not
Cass Sunstein, a prominent (and nominally-liberal) law professor.

Sunstein, working for and with right-wing deregulatory think tanks,
published a piece called “The Arithmetic of Arsenic”, arguing that
everyone needs to stop being so *emotional* about these things. We can’t
decide whether arsenic should be in our water based on fuzzy-wuzzy
arguments about not killing people. No, we need to be hard-headed
realists and decide exactly how much a human life is worth and whether
filtering arsenic is worth the cost. In short, we have to do
*cost-benefit analysis*.

As fellow law prof Tom McGarity pointed out, Sunstein continued to hold
this view despite the fact that Sunstein’s own research into the subject
showed that there was so much uncertainty around the issue that just
using different previously-published estimates could result in whatever
conclusion you like. And there was no obvious way to decide which
estimate to trust.

All of this would be just another story in the annals of out-of-touch
intellectuals — a law professor who gets off on killing people to save
money, actual facts be damned — except for one frightening fact: Barack
Obama just put this law professor in charge of cost-benefit analysis for
the whole government.

The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) was set up by
Ronald Reagan to allow him veto power over any federal regulation. If
the EPA wanted to stop companies from poisoning fish, if the DOJ wanted
to stop businesses from discriminating, if OSHA wanted to protect
miners’ lungs, OIRA could intervene and double-check their cost-benefit
analysis. They could rejigger the numbers to make it so that the
regulation got killed or if they failed at that they could just demand
more and more research from the agency, delaying the regulation it was
finally abandoned.

OIRA was one of Reagan’s most powerful tools for keeping the Federal
Government from doing its job. And now someone who’s a strong fan of its
mission has been put in charge. It’s a scary thought, especially as
you’re going to get a glass of drinking water.


Economic BS Detector
====================

January 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/economicbs)

* * * * *

People are trying to lie to you. Or maybe they just don’t know what
they’re talking about. Either way, you shouldn’t listen to them. But how
can you tell? Here’s a guidebook of key phrases that indicate someone
doesn’t know what they’re talking about when they talk about the
economy:

* * * * *

**Creates/destroys jobs.** You often hear men of business saying that
their company “created” 2000 new jobs. And in some sense that may be
true, but it’s probably less exciting if it turned out that they did it
by destroying 2000 jobs somewhere else.

The same is true for economic policy in general; it will typically
create jobs in one place, but only at the expense of losing them
somewhere else. That’s because the number of jobs (i.e. the unemployment
rate) isn’t just a free-floating fact of life; it’s specifically
controlled by the Federal Reserve.

The Federal Reserve is a cadre of bankers and economists that, among
other things, meets regularly to decide interest rates. When there are
too few jobs, they lower interest rates, making it easier for people to
borrow money and start new companies, hiring new people and creating
jobs. (The current crisis is the rare exception — interest rates are at
zero and there still aren’t enough jobs. Thus the stimulus package.)
When there are too many jobs, they raise interest rates, making it
harder for businesses to start and expand, and cutting back on jobs.

Wait, too many jobs? The Federal Reserve worries that if unemployment
gets too low, we’ll hit a cycle of accelerating inflation where prices
spiral up and up. [Critics
argue](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/predatorstate) that they actually
don’t like low unemployment because then businesses have to compete for
employees, which means they have to pay more and give out nicer
benefits. So, critics argue, they try to leave some unemployment, so
that *employees* are competing and can be pushed into taking lower
wages.

If you really care about how many jobs there are — and obviously you
should — then you shouldn’t worry about particular policies or people,
whose effects either won’t matter or will be counteracted by the Fed.
You should worry about the Fed and who controls it.

* * * * *

**Helps/hurts competitiveness.** Let’s face facts: America isn’t
competing with anyone. Remember competition? You sell a widget for \$5;
I come along and sell it for \$4; then you have to either lower your
price or lose all your customers to me and go bankrupt.

But America isn’t going to go bankrupt. Countries don’t really do that
sort of thing.

Instead, what matters for how well a country is doing is (roughly
speaking) its productivity, i.e. how much stuff it makes per person-hour
of work. Sometimes you can increase this productivity by working with
other countries — by, for example, trading some steel for some coffee.
But this is just a way to up your own country’s productivity; it has
nothing to do with competition.

The competitiveness bogeyman is often trotted out when someone is trying
to get you to do something you don’t want. “Oh, sure,” they say, “you
may not want to do it, but the Chinese are and they’re going to eat your
lunch.” It just isn’t so. Nothing will stop us from chugging along,
eating our lunch just fine; even if the Chinese are eating two lunches.

* * * * *

Sadly, a lot of “economic commentators” don’t know what they’re talking
about, so you see these phrases *everywhere*. Now that you know they’re
bogus, it should save you a lot of time.


Belém
=====

February 3, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/belem)

* * * * *

“Can we begin?” she asked, staring up at him with big pleading eyes. She
was the most beautiful girl in the room, the kind of girl you catch
yourself looking at involuntarily, because even looking is such a
thrill. And this he had done, for some time, until her gay friend came
over and told him “My friend thinks you’re beautiful.”

She spoke barely a word of English and he hardly spoke more Portuguese,
so her gay friend translated between them. “She says you are very
beautiful,” the translator would say, and he, not knowing how to react,
would ask her name. “She says she wants to be your girlfriend,” the
translator would say, and, not knowing how much was embellished, he
would ask what she did. And so it went for what seemed like an hour.

“She says, ‘Can we begin?’” the translator finally said.

“Uhh…,” he replied.

“In Brazil,” he explained, “it is traditional for the man to go first.”

“Ohh…,” he replied.

And then they made out.

Belém is like that.

* * * * *

It is a city that can only be described as *laid back*, a sprawl of
falling buildings and faded billboards, a distinctively Latin American
city, where men wander around with their shirts off and adults sit in
chairs by the side of the road. No one is ever in a hurry.

Kids roam the streets, couples hand-in-hand, with no adults in sight.
Two teens stand necking on the sidewalk. Something interesting is always
going on.

The first night we walked a block and got swept into a student opera
about the Amazon. We ducked out only to find a wrestling match staged by
clowns in drag. A few blocks away, passing three outdoor bands, we found
the waterfront, along which were a dozen shops and restaurants, and
another couple bands.

When we couldn’t find a table, a couple invited us to join theirs. When
I couldn’t speak Portuguese, they just gave the universal thumbs-up and
grinned, then offered me a drink. They copied down the address of the
bar they were heading to and tried to discuss Fergie of the Black-Eyed
Peas.

Parks are everywhere. And bars are close behind. So we went hopping from
one to another, drinking and talking long into the night.

The next morning the empty metal shells surrounding the park had been
filled in to form a bustling marketplace. The streets were full of life
and shirtless kids hauled carts on their shoulders.

* * * * *

The World Social Forum was already being dismantled by the time we got
there, but it was still inspiring in its scope. 200,000 activists came
to this city, each hoping for something bigger than themselves. They
filled up all the planes in and out and took over both universities, and
used it all to build a giant party.

Signs and arrows pointed every direction, each former classroom
commandeered for a discussion on some new topic. Kids posed for tourist
photos by the welcome sign featuring the Forum’s slogan: “Another world
is possible.” Possible, but not present. Everywhere were tables selling
books, food, trinkets, shirts. Vendors lined the sidewalks hawking
bottled water and packaged candies. Litter lined the streets.

The rain falls in spurts. First a trickle, then a flood, then right back
to a trickle. A rent-a-cop pats a girl’s head. The streets curve, and
wind, and turn back into themselves. The water here is brown, like
sludge. When I first saw it from the sky I mistook it for a strange kind
of land. I made the same mistake again when I saw it on the map.

A bus goes from one university to the other. The seats quickly fill and
kids pack into the aisle, three-deep. It ambles down a tiny narrow road,
surrounded by ramshackle *favela* houses. Kids chase each other past the
buildings. The bus passes through quickly.

The other university is packed and sprawling. A crowd stands with
umbrellas in the mud, listening to a man chant slogans from a stage. The
road continues down into the Amazon, past tent cities and soccer fields
and gardens and exhibitions. Cars share the street peacefully with
crowds of people. A boombox on the sidewalk; dancing in the streets. The
path always lined with vendors and litter.

We dead-end in a forest. A man invites us all into his truck. Watch
crowds part through the windshield. Passengers become friends and
exchange email addresses.

Discussions of tactics and theory stretch long into the night, across
rooms and cars and hotels and restaurants. And then there are the
parties.

An airplane hanger, filled with kids, all dancing. Row upon row of them,
covered in sweat and caked with mud, still carrying their bags, moving
with abandon. They stretch for what seems like forever. And at the end
is a huge stage, with dancing girls, a rocking band, and lights so
powerful that when they rotate forward they illuminate the entire crowd.
As the set ends, it feels like the whole building is about to explode.

The crowd spills out into the street, filling the surrounding blocks, as
each person goes their separate way, back to the world that already
exists.


How Depressions Work
====================

February 4, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/depressions)

* * * * *

On Capitol Hill sit many powerful people — Congressmen, Senators,
Justices — but also numerous others who do the daily work of keeping
government running. And, like anyone with such a weighty responsibility,
they sometimes want a break: a chance to see a movie or eat out with
their spouse.

Kids always make these things difficult, so in the late 1950s someone
thought of starting a Capitol Hill Babysitting Coop. The idea was
simple: a bunch of families would get together and dole out scrip —
little fake money — amongst themselves. Anytime you wanted to go out,
you could just hire another family in the coop to watch your kids: one
piece of scrip per hour. Later, of course, you’d earn the money back by
watching someone else’s kids.

It was a brilliant system and much beloved, until sometime in the 1970s.
See, when people left the babysitting coop, they got to keep the balance
of their scrip. And so, over the years, the amount of scrip in
circulation fell. Soon scrip was in short supply and people begun
hoarding theirs for fear of losing it forever. There were few
opportunities to babysit (and thus earn scrip) so people didn’t want to
lose the scrip they had by paying it to a sitter. Which, of course,
meant even fewer babysitting opportunities, making more people want to
hoard their scrip, and on and on in a downward spiral.

Since the coop consisted largely of lawmakers and lawyers, they
attempted a legislative solution to the crisis, requiring everyone go
out at least once every six months. The proposal just made things worse.
Eventually, someone tried the idea of handing out more scrip to
everyone, and soon, the coop’s delicate balance was restored.

* * * * *

![Book cover: Why the Real Estate Boom Will Not
Bust](image1_depressions)

In the 2000s, house prices started rising and everyone started sinking
their money into them. Average people would buy houses and mortgage
them, banks would buy mortgages, investors would buy mortgage
derivatives from banks, and so on. Pundits published books with titles
like *Why the Real Estate Boom Will Not Bust* and many people just
assumed housing prices would go up forever. At the peak of it, we had
roughly \$80 trillion in global financial assets.

Of course, it was clear to anyone who looked closely that this couldn’t
go on forever — and that when it stopped, it would bring a lot down with
it. And, sure enough, today housing prices are almost back to their
usual level and we now have only \$60 trillion.

Just like people taking scrip out of the babysitting coop, an enormous
amount of money has been taken out of the economy. So naturally people
want to hold on to what’s left. So they don’t spend their money, which
means there’s less employment opportunities, which means more people
want to hold on to their money, and on and on in a downward spiral.

Normally when this happens, as in a recession, the government has an
easy solution: lower interest rates. What happens is the country’s
leading bankers meet at the Federal Reserve and vote to lower interest
rates. Let’s say they decide to lower them (as they’ve done a lot
lately). Then the Federal Reserve Bank in New York starts buying up
Treasury Bills (government IOUs) for cash, injecting money into the
economy. This allows banks to lend out more money, lowering the interest
rate at which money is lent out, and thus encouraging people to start
spending again. (Later, when the economy is doing well, they’ll raise
the rates again, pulling money out and making sure things don’t get out
of hand.)

But this isn’t simply a recession. The Fed’s lowered the interest rate
to zero — *zero!* they’re giving money away — and unemployment just
keeps rising. Losing a quarter of global financial assets hurts. But now
the Fed has a problem: it can’t lower the interest rate anymore.
Interest rates don’t go any lower than zero.

Which means, as J. M. Keynes foresaw back during the first Great
Depression, we need another way of getting money into the economy. This
isn’t rocket science — Keynes suggested stuffing bills into bottles and
burying them down mineshafts; Milton Friedman once proposed tossing cash
out of helicopters. But as long as the government is spending money, we
might as well spend it on something useful. And thus, fiscal stimulus.

We spend the money to build roads and trains and high-speed Internet
connections. We give away health care and hand out welfare checks and
mail people tax rebates. We do whatever it takes to get more money into
the economy. Which people then turn around and spend on all the things
they normally start spending money on and the engine of capitalism once
again start to turn.

* * * * *

Keynes’ genius came in seeing that the Depression wasn’t a moral
problem. We’re not being punished for our exuberance or our stinginess,
just as the folks on Capitol Hill weren’t at fault for not wanting to go
out. In both cases, the problem wasn’t legislative, but merely
technical: there just wasn’t enough money to go around. And the
technical problem has a technical solution: print more money.

The moralists insist it’s irresponsible for us to just print more money.
After all, they say, debt got us into this mess; is more debt really
going to get us out? This is what they told FDR, causing him to hit the
break on a recovery that was pulling us out of the Great Depression.
This is what they told Japan, ending their recovery and plunging the
country into a “lost decade” of unemployment.

It’s not irresponsible to spend money; it’s irresponsible not to.
Factories are lying idle, people are sitting at home unemployed, and our
economy is slowing. We can spend money to make use of it all, or we can
just continue downward spiral. The choice is ours.

* * * * *

Further reading:

-   Sweeney and Sweeney, “[Monetary Theory and the Great Capitol Hill
    Baby Sitting Co-op
    Crisis](http://cda.morris.umn.edu/~kildegac/Courses/M&B/Sweeney%20&%20Sweeney.pdf)”
    [PDF]
-   DeLong, “[The Financial Crisis of 2007-2009: Understanding Its
    Causes, Consequences—and Its Possible
    Cures](http://www.scribd.com/doc/9719227/null)” [scribd]
-   Krugman, *[The Return of Depression
    Economics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393071014)*
-   Baker, [Why Stimulus Won’t Increase the
    Debt](http://www.prospect.org/csnc/blogs/beat_the_press_archive?month=11&year=2008&base_name=mankiw_promulgates_confusion_o#111235)


[image1_depressions]: image1_depressions.jpg

NYT Personals
=============

February 13, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pacer)

* * * * *

![Aaron Swartz used a free trial of the government's Pacer system to
download 19,856,160 pages of documents in a campaign to place the
information free online.](image1_pacer)

Michael Francis McElroy for The New York Times

**Attention attractive people:** Are you looking for someone respectable
enough that they’ve been *personally vetted* by the *New York Times*,
but has enough of *a bad-boy streak* that the vetting was because they
‘liberated’ *millions of dollars* of government documents? If so, look
no further than page A14 of today’s *New York Times*:

> Aaron Swartz, a 22-year-old Stanford dropout and entrepreneur who read
> Mr. Malamuds appeal, managed to download an estimated 20 percent of
> the entire database: 19,856,160 pages of text.
>
> Then on Sept. 29, all of the free servers stopped serving. The
> government, it turns out, was not pleased.
>
> A notice went out from the Government Printing Office that the free
> Pacer pilot program was suspended, pending an evaluation. A couple of
> weeks later, a Government Printing Office official, Richard G. Davis,
> told librarians that the security of the Pacer service was
> compromised. The F.B.I. is conducting an investigation.

[Continuing on the
blog](http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/02/13/steal-these-federal-records-okay-not-literally/):

> In the technology world, Mr. Swartz is kind of a big deal, as the
> saying goes. At the age of 14, he had a hand in writing RSS, the
> now-ubiquitous software used to syndicate everything from blog posts
> to news headlines directly to subscribers.
>
> [O]ver the course of six weeks, Mr. Swartz was able to download 780
> gigabytes of data — 19,856,160 pages of text — from Pacer. The caper
> grabbed an estimated 20 percent of the entire PACER network, with a
> focus on the most recent cases from almost every circuit.
>
> When the government abruptly shut down the free public program, Mr.
> Malamud saw it as a sign of possible trouble ahead. “Who shuts down a
> 17-site national program with no notice whatsoever?” he recalled
> thinking. “I immediately saw the potential for overreaction by the
> courts.”
>
> Mr. Malamud told Mr. Swartz: “You need to talk to a lawyer. I need to
> talk to a lawyer.” Mr. Swartz recalled, “I had this vision of the Feds
> crashing down the door, taking everything away.”
>
> He said he locked the deadbolt on his door, lay down on the bed for a
> while, and then called [to warn] his mother.
>
> But when lawyers told Mr. Malamud and Mr. Swartz that they appeared to
> have broken no laws, Mr. Malamud sent Mr. Swartz a message saying,
> “You should just lay low for a while.”
>
> Mr. Swartz said that he waited for a couple of months, but “nobody
> came knocking on my door. I started breathing a little more easily.”

Want to meet the man behind the headlines? Want to have the F.B.I. open
up a file on you as well? Interested in some kind of bizarre celebrity
product endorsement? I’m available in Boston and New York all this month
— contact me by [email](mailto:me@aaronsw.com),
[Facebook](http://www.facebook.com/people/Aaron-Swartz/209400), and [web
form](http://watchdog.net/about/feedback).

* * * * *

*More:*

-   John Schwartz, “[An Effort to Upgrade a Court Archive System to Free
    and
    Easy](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/13/us/13records.html?pagewanted=all),”
    *New York Times*, February 12, 2009
-   public.resource.org, “[A Cleaner
    PACER](http://public.resource.org/uscourts.gov/)” (“32 districts,
    735.9 GBytes, 19,856,160 pages”)

**UPDATE:** Schwartz expands on his story in [Steal These Federal
Records—Okay, Not
Literally](http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/02/13/steal-these-federal-records-okay-not-literally/).

[image1_pacer]: image1_pacer.jpg

Non-Hierarchical Management
===========================

February 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/management)

* * * * *

You want to get something done. But it’s too big to do it by yourself,
so you bring in some friends to help out. In your dreams, all your
friends just “click”, understand exactly what it is they’re all supposed
to do, and do it quickly and effective. In reality, this almost never
happens.

In order for any team to succeed, they need someone helping them all
stay on track — someone who we will call a “manager”.

The word manager makes many people uncomfortable. It calls up the image
of a bossman telling you what to do and forcing you to slave away at
doing it. That is not effective management.

A better way to think of a manager is as a servant, like an editor or a
personal assistant. Everyone wants to be effective; a manager’s job is
to do everything they can to make that happen. The ideal manager is
someone everyone would want to have.

Instead of the standard “org chart” with a CEO at the top and employees
growing down like roots, turn the whole thing upside down. Employees are
at the top — they’re the ones who actually get stuff done — and managers
are underneath them, helping them to be more effective. (The CEO, who
really does nothing, is of course at the bottom.)

Most guides on management are written for big bosses at big companies,
not people starting something new who want their team to be as effective
as possible. (Hi, startup founders!) So herewith, a guide to effective
non-hierarchical management.

Point 1: Management is a job.
-----------------------------

Management is not a typical job. People who manage programmers don’t
spend their day programming. Nor do they spend their day writing memos.
In fact, from the outside, it may appear like they don’t spend their day
doing very much at all. Don’t be fooled.

Management is a serious job. It is incredibly difficult and wildly
consuming. As an employee, if you miss a day off work, it’s no big deal:
some work doesn’t get done and you (or someone else) has to catch up on
it later. As a manager, it can become a serious problem — if you’re not
working, then the dozen people you serve aren’t working effectively as
well. It makes knocking off work to go to the fair a stressful
proposition.

On the other hand, it can be incredibly rewarding. If you do your job
right, you turn a group of individuals into a team, a group that’s more
effective than the sum of its parts. Together, you and your team can
achieve amazing things. As a manager, your task is to serve the team —
to make it as effective as it can possibly be, even if that means
stepping on the toes of a few individuals.

One incredibly popular misconception is that managers are just there to
provide “leadership” — you set everyone up, get them pointed in the
right direction, and then let them go while you go back to the “real”
stuff, whether it’s building things yourself, meeting with funders, or
going on the road and talking up your organization. Those are all
perfectly valid jobs, but they are not management. You have to pick one.
You cannot do both.

### Point 1a: Stay organized.

As the manager, it’s your job to make sure things get done. This means
you need a system for making sure things get done. This doesn’t have to
be anything fancy or complicated — a simple todo list will do — but
simply trying to remember or writing yourself a note is not a system.

One of the nice things about having a system is it actually makes you
less stressed out. Most people just keep their todo list somewhere in
the back of their head. As things pile up, they become harder and harder
to keep track of, and you become more stressed out about getting them
all done or forgetting about them.

Simply writing them down on a list makes everything seem more
manageable. You can see the things you have to do — really, there’s not
quite as many important ones as you thought — and you can put them in
order and get that nice burst of satisfaction that comes from crossing
them off.

Yes, it all sounds like silly, basic stuff, but it’s important. Just
having a list with all the stuff you need to do — and taking it
seriously, actually going down it and checking stuff off every single
day — is the difference between being a black hole of action items and
being someone who actually Gets Stuff Done.

Point 2: Know your team.
------------------------

As a servant, it’s crucial you know your masters well. You need to know
what they’re good at and what gives them trouble. You need to be able to
tell when they’re feeling good and when they’re in a rut. And you need
to have a safe enough relationship with them that they can be honest
with you and come to you when they’re in trouble. This is not easy. (You
have to be willing to hear bad news about yourself.)

The most important piece is understanding what people are good at and
what they like doing. A good first step is to just ask them, but often
people are wrong or don’t know. So you try giving them different things,
seeing how they do at them, and adjusting accordingly.

But in addition to your team’s professional skills, it’s important to
understand their personal goals. However much you may care about the
work, at bottom it’s still a job. You need to understand why your team
members took it. Was it because it seemed interesting? Because it seemed
worthwhile? Because it would give them valuable experience and help them
get a better job down the road? It’s important that you know, so you can
make sure your tasks and expectations are in line with their goals.

### Point 2a: Hire people smarter than you.

You want the best working for you. People who aren’t just good at their
job, but people who are also good at *your* job. People you can trust to
not just do something right but tell you that the way you suggested
doing it was wrong. People you can rely on to get things done if you
just stay out of their way. At least, that’s the ideal. In practice,
it’s hard to find people like that and even when you do, they still need
help.

I have never found the traditional methods of hiring — resumés,
interviews, quizzes — to be helpful at all. Instead, I look at two
things: what someone has done and whether I enjoy spending time with
them. The first shows not just their talent but also their ability to
execute. If they haven’t made something interesting, whether as a side
project or at a previous job, then they’re probably not worth hiring.
It’s not *that* hard to sit down and accomplish something; be wary of
people who haven’t.

Similarly, you need to keep in mind that you’re not just hiring a robot
— you’re hiring a flesh-and-blood human who you’re going to need to
spend a lot of time with during the day. That means they need to be
someone you not just get along with, but enjoy being around. A formal
interview, with all its stress and structure and contrivance, is a
pretty bad environment for seeing if you like someone. Instead, just go
get coffee and chat.

### Point 2b: Be careful when hiring friends.

Everyone wants to work with their friends. After all, you have so much
fun hanging out after work, why not hang out during work too? So they
recruit their friends to work with them. (Or, even worse, they recruit
their lovers.) But being friends is very different from being
colleagues. All friends learn ways to adjust themselves to each other —
which tones to use, which subjects to avoid, when to give each other
space.

These go out the window when you’re working together. You can’t just not
say things because they’ll get your friend upset. So you say them, and
they get upset, and you realize you have no way of dealing with each
other when you’re like this. It makes working together difficult, to say
the least.

The situation is the same, but vastly worse, with couples. Plus, you’re
really screwed when your relationship falls apart under the stress.

If you do decide to work with people you’re close with, you need to find
a way to put your other relationship “on hold” while you work together.
Which means you both need to be strong enough to be able to blow up at
each other at work and then go out for drinks like nothing ever
happened. If you can’t do this (and few can), then either give up on the
relationship or give up on the job.

The most extreme form of this, of course, is that you need to be able to
fire your friend. Just because you like them doesn’t mean they’ll
automatically be a good employee. And, sadly, there’s really no way for
you to know in advance. Bad employees are no less disastrous because
they’re your friends. Which means that if you hire a friend, you need to
be able to fire them.

### Point 2c: Set boundaries.

Conversely, don’t become close friends with the people you work with.
You have to set some personal boundaries: you’re their manager, not
their friend. Naturally, part of being a manager means that you have to
talk to people about their personal problems and possibly even offer
advice. After all, it’s your job to make your team effective and if
personal problems are distracting from that, you are going to have to
face someone’s personal problems.

But be sure to keep these problems at arm’s length. Actually getting
involved in someone’s personal life or otherwise establishing a close
personal relationship them is asking for trouble.

Point 3: Go over the goals together.
------------------------------------

Your first job as a manager is to make sure everyone’s on the same page.
The team needs to understand what they’re expected to do, why they’re
doing it, and who else is involved (funding it, using it, counting on
it). If you picked a good team (point 2a), they’ll hear this and find
holes in your plan and catch things you hadn’t thought of. (Which is
good! Together, you can fix it.)

But real work can’t begin until everyone’s on board with the plan.

### Point 3a: Build a community.

You’re not managing a bunch of individual employees; you’re managing a
team. You’re all trying to accomplish the same goal. It’s the manager’s
job to make sure everyone’s comfortable with each other. (Hint: Those
dumb break-the-ice games do not make people *more* comfortable.) And
while there’s obviously a lot of feedback you need to give people
one-on-one (*never* chew people out in front of a group), you should try
to do a lot in front of the team as well.

It’s easy to fall into a trap where you’re just giving feedback
individually. The result is that everyone feels isolated, not knowing
where their work fits in to the bigger picture. Providing opportunities
for everyone to see what everyone else is up to is crucial to making
your team actually feel like it’s a community, instead of just a group
of your friends. (First law of friendship drift: Just because you like
two people doesn’t mean they’ll automatically like each other.)

It’s also a good opportunity to set a tone. You want people to treat
each other like friends and colleagues, not backstabbing assholes or
bickering siblings. As my friend Clay comments:

> I have a “no asshole rule” which is really simple: I really don’t want
> to work with assholes. So if you’re an asshole and you work on my
> team, I’m going to fire you. Now, if the whole team says “gosh, that’s
> awful. We want to work with as many assholes as we can!” then we have
> a simple solution. I’ll fire me! (FYI: The “No Asshole Rule” is a
> book. I thought it was actually a pretty good book as far as Business
> books go. As far as I’m concerned, anybody could stand to read 100
> pages giving them the MBA Book cover they need to say to their boss:
> let’s get the assholes out of here.)

But a community is about more than just tone, there’s process as well.
You need to figure out how your team members work and how you can get
them to work together. Some people like constant human feedback; others
like locking themselves in a room for a couple hours and just getting
something done. Everyone has their own habits and styles. Your job is to
find an appropriate mix that makes everyone as productive they can be.

Point 4: Assign responsibility.
-------------------------------

First, break the plan up into parts. Make sure everybody understands the
parts.

Second, find a team member who wants to do each part. The key word here
is *wants* — some things just have to get done, it’s true, but things
will get done much better by people who want to do them.

One of the weird facts of life is that for just about everything you
hate doing, there is someone out there who loves doing it. (There are
even people who get a real kick out of cleaning toilets.) You may not
currently employ them and you may not be able to hire them, but the is
the goal worth striving toward.

It’s also important to realize that a lot of what makes a task
attractive or unattractive is outside the task itself. Managing the
company’s accounting books at first seems like a pretty uninteresting
job. But when you realize it makes you indispensable and gives you
authority over how all the money is spent, it suddenly seems a little
more exciting. Use your knowledge from point 2 to structure tasks in a
way that’s attractive to your team members.

### Point 4a: Vary responsibilities.

Another thing to keep in mind is that most people like variety in their
work. It’s very tempting to think of someone as “the finance guy” and
just give them all the finance-related tasks. But in any organization
there’s lots of different kinds of things to do and a wide mix of people
to do it. Many people will appreciate the opportunity to switch up the
kinds of things they do.

It’s tempting to think that this is inefficient, that by having one guy
do all the finance tasks they’ll become an expert in it and the finance
tasks will get done more effectively. And there’s definitely some truth
in it. But one of the best ways to be inefficient is to make your team
unhappy. If doing something new makes someone enjoy their job more,
it’ll be well worth the cost in time of them having to learn how to do
it.

Even better, their fresh perspective might just help you make
improvements you’d never thought of before.

### Point 4b: Delegate responsibility.

As the manager, it’s a continual temptation to keep important jobs for
yourself. After all, they’re usually fun to do and doggone-it they’re
*important*, you can’t risk them on somebody else! Resist the
temptation.

For one thing, taking jobs for yourself is one way of distracting
yourself from having to do actual management (point 1). But more
importantly, you’ll never be able to develop your team if you keep all
the real responsibility for yourself. Sure, Jony may not be as good at
meeting funders as you, but a lot of that’s because she’s never gotten a
chance to practice. If it’s something she wants to do (point 2), take
her along and give him a chance to learn.

Point 5: Clear obstacles.
-------------------------

This is the bulk of what non-hierarchical management is about. You’ve
got good people, they’ve got good responsibilities. Now it’s your job to
do everything in your power to help them get them done.

A good way to start is just by asking people what they need. Is their
office too noisy? Did they get confused about something you said? Are
they stuck on a particular problem? Are they overwhelmed with work? It’s
your job to help them out: get them a quieter office, clarify things,
find them advice or answers, shift some stuff off their plate. They
shouldn’t be wasting time with things that annoy them; that’s your job.

But you have to be proactive as well. People tend to suffer quietly,
both because they don’t want to come whining to you and just because
when you’re stuck in a rut all your attention is focused on the rut. A
key part of being a manager is checking in with people, pointing out
that they’re stuck in a rut, and gently helping them out.

### Point 5a: Prioritize.

At any given time, there’s lots of stuff that needs to be done. Part of
your job is helping people decide what to tackle first. You don’t want
to be *too* didactic about it — people like choice and variety, they’re
not always so happy when you just give them one instruction after
another — but even that’s usually far preferable to being overwhelmed
with stuff.

The best prioritization relationship is a dialogue: “OK, what’s next?”
someone asks. “Well, what about building the new sprocket management
engine?” “Ugh, I’m too tired for that today.” “OK, how about cleaning
the frobnitz?” “Bo-ring.” “Oh, I know! We need someone to document the
doohickey.” “Ooh, perfect — thanks!”

### Point 5b: Fight procrastination.

Procrastination is the crop blight of the office-work world. It affects
just about everyone and it’s very hard to fight alone. The single best
way to stop procrastination is to sit down with someone and come up with
the next concrete step they have to take and then start doing it
together. There’s something magical about having another person sit down
with you and do something that can overcome procrastination’s natural
resistance. And once you get someone started, momentum can often carry
them through the rest of the day.

Even if all you do is help people overcome procrastination, you will be
well worth it.

Point 6: Give feedback.
-----------------------

White-collar work is lonely. You sit at a desk, staring at a screen,
poking at buttons. It’s easy to get lost and off-track and depressed.
That’s why it’s important to check in and see how things are doing. Not
only does it give you a chance to see how people are doing (point 5), it
gives you a chance to see how things are coming and gently steer them
back on course if they’ve drifted from what you’ve intended.

### Point 6a: Don’t micromanage.

Remember, your job isn’t to tell people *how* to do things; it’s to help
them get it done. Sometimes this means helping them figure out how to do
it, but in general you should assume that you work with smart people and
they’ll be able to handle it themselves. Again, be a servant, not a
boss.

Studies consistently show that people are much happier and more
productive when they have control over the way they work. Never take
that away.

Point 7: Don’t make decisions (unless you *really* have to).
------------------------------------------------------------

As manager, people will often come to you to make decisions or resolve
disputes. It’s very tempting, with people looking up at you for
guidance, to want to give your sage advice. But the fact is, even if (or
especially if) as a manager you’re held up on a pedestal, you probably
know less about the question than anyone else on the team.

The worst managers don’t just make decisions when people come to them,
they parachute in and start dictating tiny details. The urge to do this
can be overwhelming, but there are few things more disastrous to morale.
If you really have to give input, couch it as such. And if people fight
back, know when to step back and say “look, you’re the expert. I was
just giving my two cents.” (Hint: It’s right after they start fighting
back.)

The best managers use these opportunities not to dictate an answer, but
to have a Socratic dialogue to help figure out what the best answer is.
Often when people are stuck on something, they really just need someone
else to talk things over with, either for assistance or validation.
Here’s your chance to help.

Point 8: Fire ineffective people.
---------------------------------

Firing people is hard. It’s probably the hardest thing you’ll ever do.
People go to absurd lengths to try and make it easier (“we’ll just try
him out for a month and see how it goes” is a common one) but they never
really help. You just have to bite the bullet and let people go. It’s
your job. If you can’t do it, find someone else.

Firing people isn’t just about saving money, or petty things like that.
It’s the difference between a great organization and a failure.
Inefective people drag everyone else down to their level. They make it
so that you can’t take pride in what you’re doing, so that you dread
going into work in the morning, so that you can’t rely on the other
pieces of the project getting done. And assholes, no matter how talented
they may be, are even worse. Conversely, there are few things more fun
than working hard with a really nice, talented group of people.

You are never going to be able to tell whether someone is going to work
out in advance. Assholes are sometimes easy to spot, but people can have
great resumes, solid references, a charming interview style, and still
be total failures. And the worst part is, there will always be excuses
for their failures. “I know, I know,” they’ll say, “it’s just that I’ve
been really sick this week. I’ve been distracted with family things.
I’ve been traveling. Look, I’m sorry. I promise I’ll do better this
week.” I’ve said them all myself.

If you’re not getting things done, you can always come up with excuses
for why. Competent people get things done anyway. Ineffective ones let
the excuses pile up. They’re not going to leave themselves. You have to
pull the trigger.

Point 9: Give away the credit.
------------------------------

As the team’s manager, there will be many opportunities where people
will want to give you credit. And getting credit is nice, it makes you
feel good. So you start coming up with excuses for why you deserve it,
even though you didn’t do any of the work. “Well, it was my vision,” you
will say. “I was the one who made it all happen.”

But think of all those talented people slaving away at desks. They were
the ones who actually made it happen. Make sure they get the credit. And
not in a facetious, “thanks to all the little people way”. No, you need
to own up. You are the assistant. They did all the work. As Clay says,
“A manager’s worst enemy is his or her own ego.”

Point 10: You’re probably not cut out for this.
-----------------------------------------------

Spending your days doing grunt work for people who are smarter than you.
Obsessing over their mood and personal problems. Turning down all
opportunities to take credit or get attention so you can continue to
work as a servant. Does this really sound like a job you want?

Probably not. Few people are cut out for it. It’s really hard. It’s
incredibly stressful. It’s not at all glamorous.

But it’s vitally important. A team without a manager is doomed to be an
ineffective team. So if you can’t do it, find somebody else.

*Thanks to [Clay
Johnson](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/people/cjohnson/) and [Emmett
Shear](http://blog.emmettshear.com/) for their comments on drafts of
this essay.*


RSS Hits the Big Time
=====================

February 21, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rssstimulus)

* * * * *

As [chaunceyt pointed
out](http://groups.google.com/group/sunlightlabs/browse_thread/thread/dfd9fd76be9b6f1b),
the new stimulus bill’s [implementation
instructions](http://www.recovery.gov/files/Initial%20Recovery%20Act%20Implementing%20Guidance.pdf)
require that each government agency report the money it gives out in
RSS:

> For each of the near term reporting requirements (major
> communications, formula block grant allocations, weekly reports)
> agencies are required to provide a feed (preferred: Atom 1.0,
> acceptable: RSS) of the information so that content can be delivered
> via subscription.

The document is very clear that the items in the feed can’t simply be
unstructured text, but have to be reusable data, e.g.:

> **Formula Block Grant Allocation Reports:** Agencies are asked to
> provide Formula Block Grant Allocation information as soon as it
> becomes available. Data elements for the formula block grant
> allocation feed should include:
>
>   Data Elements            Description                                                                                                                                                                                                            Field Type
>   ------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------
>   Recipient Name           The name of the recipient of the award.                                                                                                                                                                                varchar(45)
>   Federal Funding Amount   Amount of federal government’s obligation or contingent liability, in dollars. A negative number represents a decrease in funding.                                                                                     int(11)
>   Recipient DUNS           Unique nine-digit number issued by Dun & Bradstreet to the agency. Followed by an optional DUNS Plus 4 which allows an agency to submit different bank account data for a single DUNS (Assigned by Dun & Bradstreet)   char(13)
>   *[…]*
>
And it goes on like this for several pages.

Pretty amazing to see a government so tech-savvy.

**Obligatory plug:** Want to see more like this? [Sign up to keep in
touch with the PCCC](http://boldprogressives.org/). We’re trying to get
better congresspeople elected thru Internet organizing and better tools.


A 24 Puzzle
===========

March 4, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/24copies)

* * * * *

Imagine you’ve kidnapped the President of the United States. You record
her making a statement that, if published, will strengthen the
international forces of evil. The military is about to blow up the
building you’re in, so you have to get the video out electronically, but
they’re monitoring your communications and will be able to put enormous
pressure on anyone who receives a copy from you.

Here’s the question: in the few minutes you have before the building is
reduced to rubble, where do you upload the video to maximize the chance
that it will get published?

* * * * *

Alright, so your first inclination is to upload it to your servers, but
that’s easy — they just seize your servers.

So you upload it to YouTube and have Google copy it to all of their
servers. But then they just call Google and have them delete it.

Obviously if you had it on the front page of a popular website, that
would solve things, but the front pages of popular websites are pretty
closely guarded.

You could try mailing it to WikiLeaks, but although WikiLeaks is pretty
openminded, they may not actually want to strengthen the international
forces of evil. The same goes for any other particular free speech
activist you could name — dst, Cryptome, etc.

Your best bet is probably to have a smart guy on the outside who keeps
uploading it various places from behind Tor as older copies get deleted.
But how many people have smart guys on the outside?

You could try spamming it to a bunch of blogs, wikis, and other sites
(or even by email or IM for that matter), but that’ll take too long —
you only have a couple of minutes and probably a flaky connection to
boot. There’s no way you can hit very many servers.

You could publish it on a Tor hidden service, but then they’d probably
just DOS the whole Tor network.

Freenet seems too small and unreliable. Other P2P systems don’t even
make copies except on request.

Usenet seems like it should be a promising option, but does anyone use
Usenet anymore?

More promising options seem like emailing it to some kind of large
mailing list. But which list has the most insane free speech activists?
(cypherpunks? lkml?) And will it mail out all those copies before the
Feds get it unplugged?

How else do you get stuff onto lots of people’s machines? Web, Usenet,
email, IM, HTTP access logs, DNS caches.

Can you think of anything better?

* * * * *

The current winner is [Andy Baio
with](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/24copies#c3):

> Upload it to Sharebee (which then sends it out to Megaupload,
> Rapidshare and a bunch of other anonymous hosting sites) and post the
> link to 4chan. They’re big on evil over there.


The Intellectual’s Creed
========================

March 5, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intelcreed)

* * * * *

> [T]he ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they
> are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly
> understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men,
> who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual
> influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen
> in authority, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy
> from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the
> power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the
> gradual encroachment of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a
> certain interval; for in the field of economic and political
> philosophy there are not many who are influenced by new theories after
> they are twenty-five or thirty years of age, so that the ideas which
> civil servants and politicians and even agitators apply to current
> events are not likely to be the newest. But, soon or late, it is
> ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evil.

(John Maynard Keynes, *[General
Theory](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch24.htm)*,
last page)

*Previously:* [The Activist’s
Creed](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/activcreed), [The Sociologist’s
Creed](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/soccreed)


In Defense of Elections
=======================

March 9, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/proelections)

* * * * *

Traditional left-wing thought treats elections as epiphenomenal: build a
strong enough social movement and politicians will be forced to do what
you want. In this view, it doesn’t really matter who gets elected since
they’re ultimately all subject to the same structural forces. Working to
get someone “good” elected is really just a waste of time, since they’ll
turn out to be as bad as all the others once they get into office.

(Think Noam Chomsky’s comments about the unimportance of electoral
politics, or the Alinskyite theory that one should try to cultivate an
attitude of “fear and loathing” among politicians.)

There’s clearly a great deal of truth to this — structural forces are
ultimately very powerful. But I think it misses a great deal as well.
This model assumes politicians are this separate class of rational
actors who respond purely to electoral incentives; if your grassroots
movement gets them votes, they’ll help you out, but they’re just as
happy to sell you out to a higher bidder.

But what if the politicians involved are actually activists themselves?
What if the choice isn’t between joining a electoral campaign and
joining an issue campaign, but between starting a electoral campaign and
starting an issue campaign? Here I think the calculus changes wildly.

For one thing, just at the campaign level, electoral campaigns have a
lot of advantage over issue campaigns. They fit into a designated “news
hole” so it’s easier for the media to cover them, they have clear
deadlines which spur people to action, and there’s a clear existing
model for how to do them (including fundraising, scheduling, volunteer
management, etc.).

Furthermore, if you actually win, you can now continue the campaign from
a much stronger institutional base: you’ll have a full-time salaried
staff, your pronouncements will be *de facto* news, and there will be
strong social pressure preventing the whole thing from fizzling out as
people decide to do other things with their lives.

Of course, there’s also the positive impact you can make as an
officeholder. Obviously you’ll be able to help institutionalize your
goals by passing laws and regulations you support (just as you would try
to push as an outsider), but you’ll also be able to promote things in
innumerable smaller ways, just by meeting with other politicians and
using the influence of your office. Take this story from Matt Taibbi
about Bernie Sanders, the socialist Senator from Vermont:

> [He] kept coming back to a story about his very first meeting with the
> Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee. At the meeting, the
> subject of the Head Start program had come up. Ted Kennedy, who runs
> the committee, had proposed a modest increase. Sanders wanted more—so
> he went and had a word with Kennedy after the meeting.
>
> “The end result is that we got a 6 percent increase, instead of a 4
> percent increase,” he said. “Over a three-year period, that’s five
> hundred million dollars more. What I’m finding out is it’s just a
> different world. Not saying it’s better, it’s just different. If you
> want something you just go talk to someone in the hall. […]”
>
> He tried to sound like it was a good thing, and it might very well
> have been, in terms of getting more money for a worthy-enough program.
> But the subtext of this story was Sanders expressing amazement that he
> could get \$500 million just by talking to someone. As any human being
> would, he looked blown away by the reality of his situation.

(*The Great Derangement*, 127)

Obviously there are few offices as powerful as United States Senator,
but every job has opportunities for simple victories like these, if at a
much smaller scale. Sure, outside groups can always try to push
officials to do things like this, but if you actually are the elected
official you can just do them. (Plus, how often do outside groups know
about these simple things?)

The late Senator Paul Wellstone, who came to electoral politics from
grassroots organizing himself, argued that political change had three
parts: the intellectual work of discovering what’s wrong and how to fix
it (i.e. policy development), the organizing work of mobilizing citizens
into activist groups, and the electoral work of running for office and
getting elected. And it seems that the left seems to neglect the last of
these.

For a young leftist, a career in academia or the think tanks is an easy
choice, while those who are bolder go into full-time activism. But
running for office never seems like a viable option. (When people ask
Noam Chomsky how they can fix things, he never says they should run for
office.) (We’ll ignore for a moment the delusion the left seems to have
that they should run for office as a third-party in a two-party system.)
The result is a severe deficit of genuine leftist candidates. Which of
course feeds their sense that politicians are just going to sell you
out.

Leftists need to think more about running for office. Not as an
alternative to advocacy or activism, but as an extension of it.
Campaigns are an incredible opportunity to explain and fight for the
issues you believe in, while elected offices are a great opportunity to
achieve them. That’s how [the left took Santa
Cruz](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/santacruz/progressive_politics.html),
probably the only real city in the country with a leftist government,
and that’s how they’ll take the country.


Journalistic Capture and Fixing CNBC
====================================

March 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fixcnbc)

* * * * *

*Attention conservation notice:* Just [Fix CNBC!](http://fixcnbc.com/a)
and add your name.

Sometimes the government will set up a new regulatory agency, like a
Mine Safety and Health Administration or something to keep watch on the
mining industry. And off they go, investigating the mining industry to
make sure they’re being safe.

Only something funny happens. It turns out all the people they talk to
all day are mining industry officials. And whenever they hold meetings
to ask for advice, the only people who show up are mining industry
officials. When they make proposals and ask for public comment, all the
comments are from mining industry officials. And pretty soon, they start
thinking like mining industry officials.

Academics call this regulatory capture — an office was put in place to
regulate an industry, but it ended up just being a tool of the industry.

But what’s striking is that the problem isn’t just limited to
regulation; the same thing happens to journalists as well. Call it
journalistic capture. And there are few examples of it more obvious than
that of CNBC.

CNBC, a channel supposed to cover economic news, basically acts as a
full-time cheerleader for the financial industry. When the market was
booming, this wasn’t so noticeable. Whole swaths of the country started
daytrading and checking the CNBC ticker regularly to feed their buy-sell
trigger fingers.

But now that the market’s gone belly-up, it all seems a whole lot less
appealing. Which is what Jon Stewart has been getting at with his
critiques of the network.

Well, it’s less satisfying to complain when you can actually do
something about it, so some friends and I have started a new campaign:
**Fix CNBC!** [As HuffPo
reported](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/03/16/economists-progresses-pet_n_175249.html),
we’re demanding CNBC commit to holding Wall Street accountable, starting
with hiring someone who was *right* about the economic crisis.

We’d really love for you to sign our open letter:

-   [Fix CNBC!](http://fixcnbc.com/a)



Who Really Rules?
=================

March 23, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whoreallyrules)

* * * * *

*Who Really Rules?*, by G. William Domhoff, is one of my very favorite
books. But explaining why will take some background. In the 1950s and
60s researchers were looking at what they called the “power structure”
in American cities — the people who really pulled the strings and called
the shots. Foremost among them was Floyd Hunter, whose study of Atlanta
practically invented the field. Naturally the whole notion that anyone
was pulling the shots behind the scenes in America offended the deans of
mainstream liberal political science and so their leader, Robert A.
Dahl, set out to defend democracy’s good name.

He argued that one could only figure out who was in charge by doing
careful case studies — looking at controversial decisions and seeing who
was involved in making them — that and only that could tell you where
true power lay. And, in his most famous work, *Who Governs?: Democracy
and Power in an American City* he aimed to do just such a case study in
his hometown of New Haven, where his employer, Yale University, resides.

Dahl proposed a theory called pluralism in which no small elect is in
charge but power is instead shared across conflicting groups, each
marshaling its own resources on the issues it feels strongly about.
Democracy, although perhaps in a more sophisticated form, is vindicated,
and the ridiculous notions of a shadowy elite disproven. As Dahl writes:

> It is all the more improbable, then, that a secret cabal of Notables
> dominates the public life of New Haven through means so clandestine
> that not one of the fifty prominent citizens interviewed in the courts
> of this study—citizens who had participated extensively in various
> decisions—hinted at the existence of such a cabal; so clandestine,
> indeed, that no clues turned up in several years of investigation led
> to the door of such a group. (185)

Of course that wasn’t quite true. Domhoff was skeptical of Dahl’s
results and decided to request access to his source material and
reresearch the matter for himself. In going through Dahl’s interview
notes, Domhoff found these choice comments:

> First Informant said that [contacting the First National Bank] was
> essential, that they had to deal with what he called the “power
> structure” if they wanted to accomplish anything. First Informant kept
> emphasizing the “power structure.”
>
> According to Second Informant, nothing gets done without the First
> National Bank saying so. According to him, it is “at the top of the
> power structure.” … I asked him why … [and he] said, “Just look at
> who’s on its board of directors.” … He said, “The bank’s support is
> necessary for anything that is done in this town including
> redevelopment.” (Sounds like a quote from Hunter.)

But, of course, Dahl wanted to disprove Hunter, not sound like him, so
he never followed up on these leads. But Domhoff does. In the
intellectual battle over which version of how cities work is more
accurate, he scores a decisive victory over Dahl. He not only takes
Dahl’s method, he also takes Dahl’s town and indeed his specific case
study and shows how the decisions were made by a sinister cabal after
all.

And his results are much more convincing. Dahl, after all, was trying to
prove a negative: that there *wasn’t* anyone pulling the strings.
Whereas Domhoff can simply point out who was. Dahl’s central case study
is the question of New Haven urban renewal. A bold Democratic mayor, he
claims, came into office and proposed a plan, dragging local businessmen
and Federal officials along with him to get it done.

Nonsense, says Domhoff. The plan for urban renewal was drafted by the
local chamber of commerce years before. And when the new mayor got
elected, the Chamber of Commerce invited him to lunch and explained the
whole thing. They even told the mayor who to hire to carry the plan out
and, in the end, got exactly what they’d wanted all along.

But Domhoff doesn’t simply prove Dahl wrong. He gives an engrossing case
study of how powerful businessmen get things like this done, based on
extensive archival research and contemporaneous notes. And he tells an
entire alternative history of American urban renewal, showing how big
business turned a plan to build housing for the poor into an excuse to
expel them to make room for upscale businesses.

The result is a *tour de force*: a complete demolition of one of the
most influential books of political science, an engrossing case study of
how power really operates, and an example of how to do research into the
people who, after all, really rule.

-   [My summary of Domhoff’s
    book](http://sciencethatmatters.com/archives/25)
-   [An updated, enhanced, and online version of Domhoff’s
    book](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/new_haven.html)
-   [Domhoff’s book
    itself](http://openlibrary.org/b/OL8091744M/Who-Really-Rules%3F)



Margo Seltzer
=============

March 24, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/margo)

* * * * *

*[part of Ada Lovelace Day](http://findingada.com/)*

Margo Ilene Seltzer was born in rural, upstate New York. “I like to
describe it as a place with more cows than people,” she later told an
interviewer. In her small town, she excelled in math and science, but
wasn’t sure that this would translate when she began attending Harvard
for college in 1979.

Graduating in 1983, she studied Applied Mathematics, with a computer
science concentration. She took some time to work in industry before
going to graduate school in Computer Science at Berkeley in 1988. Her
dissertation, completed in 1992, was on “File System Performance and
Transaction Support” and found that, due to the costs of garbage
collection in most real-world uses, log-structured filesystems in the
literature were not any faster than read-optimized filesystems.

At the time, Berkeley’s CS department was excitedly developing BSD,
writing free replacements for all the Unix utilities. They needed a
replacement for ndbm, the prominent Unix database manager, and hsearch,
its hash search function, and Margo had just finished taking a database
course. She decided to apply her new skills by writing hash for BSD.
Someone else wrote btree and they both ended up getting packaged
together as db185, which shipped with BSD 4.4.

BerkeleyDB, as it became known, was used in many places but among them
was the University of Michigan LDAP server. Netscape built upon this
server for their own directory product but found that since bsddb didn’t
support transactions, multiple concurrent writes could lead to corrupted
data. They noticed that Margo had once written a paper on the subject of
adding transactions and gave her a call. It was 1996.

She said that it was simply academic work and wasn’t ready for use in
production. They asked if she could get it ready for production. They
could pay, they reminded her. It was the first time she’d ever done
anything like this for pay, but she gathered together some friends and
founded a company to make the product for Netscape. They relicensed it
from BSD (which allows anyone to integrate it) to their own GPL-style
license which would allow them to continue to separately charge Netscape
for using it. Their company was called Sleepycat, and Margo was its CTO.

The company was a major success, with BerkeleyDB being used in
everything from SQL databases to behind-the-scenes at Amazon and Google.
In 2006, as Oracle was acquiring all the open source database companies,
they acquired Sleepycat and Margo went to work for Oracle.

At the same time, however, she was pursuing a parallel career in
academia. In 1992 she became an Assistant Professor of Computer Science
at Harvard. She became an Associate Professor in 1997, was named Gordon
McKay Professor in 2000 and received tenure, occasioning [a *Crimson*
editorial](http://www.thecrimson.com/article.aspx?ref=100809) on how a
woman “beat all the odds”. From 2002 to 2006, she was also Associate
Dean. A widely-respected professor in the field, she’s published over a
hundred papers and served on numerous committees.

She is also noted as an inspiring teacher. She received two awards,
Roslyn Abramson and Phi Beta Kappa, for excellence in teaching. And her
course receives a 4.9 out of 5 in student ratings. Computer science
students around campus often remark with surprise at how open and
welcoming she is to young students as such a famous and respected
professor.

Nor has she sacrificed her family, taking her children with her to the
office and reserving time to spend with them at home.

A standout in so many ways, it seems the one struggle left is finding a
new struggle. “Now that the pressure’s off,” she told a reporter, “I’ve
started to ask myself: What’s my next goal? I won my black belt in
karate a year ago. I’ve got tenure, a wonderful family, and a thriving
business. It’s time to figure out what’s next.”


The Logic of Loss
=================

April 13, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/logicofloss)

* * * * *

Imagine someone offered you a 1% chance of winning a million dollars.
How much would you pay for it? The natural inclination would be to say
you break even at 1% of a million, which is \$10,000. Even if you could
scrape together the cash, this doesn’t seem like a very good deal. After
all, there’s a 99% chance that you’ll have just thrown away ten grand.

Where did we go wrong? The problem is that calculating the average value
this way only makes sense if you get to take the deal enough times to
expect an average result. If you bought a couple thousand of these
chances at \$9000 each, then you might start to come out ahead. But
buying just one doesn’t seem very bright.

Of course, the same logic applies to more pedestrian examples of risk.
It probably doesn’t make sense to invest in just one startup, even if
the returns on startups are huge. That’s why VCs invest in large numbers
of startups; the returns from the wins balance out the flops.

This should seem pretty obvious, but some people seem to forget it a
lot. Take the St. Petersburg paradox. Imagine this game: A dollar is
placed on the table and a coin is flipped. If the coin comes up heads,
the money is doubled and the coin is flipped again. Tails, the game ends
and you take the money. How much would you pay to play?

The paradox comes about because the naive answer here is infinite.
There’s a 50% chance you get a dollar (=fifty cents), a 25% chance you
get 2 (another fifty cents), a 12.5% chance you get 4 (again), and so on
infinitely. But, naturally, it seems insane to pay a fortune to play
this game. Thus the paradox.

Folks seem to be genuinely stumped about this, but it’s just the first
offer taken to the limit: instead of a 1% chance of making a million,
you have an infinitesimal chance of making an infinity. If you got to
play the game an infinite number of times, shelling out cash might begin
to make sense, but if you only play it once it’s not worth much.

Keep that in mind next time someone offers you a game.


What Are Intellectuals Good For?
================================

April 14, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scialabba)

* * * * *

There was once an era where great men strode among us. The
Intellectuals, as they were known, had an opinion on everything and
would share it, at length, with elegance and verve. Unfortunately, the
explosion of information beginning in the sixties rendered them
all-but-extinct and the electronic transformation of the past few
decades threatens to finish the job. Still, we can’t but admire them and
their milieu.

This certainly seems to be George Scialabba’s position. The greatest
working book reviewer — when the National Book Critics Circle
inaugurated their Excellence in Criticism award, he was their first
recipient — collects his reviews of these grand men’s work and a
sampling of his own in his new collection, *What Are Intellectuals Good
For?* The result is a delightful introduction to this world of ideas.

Scialabba’s own position is best summarized by his dedication: “For
Chomsky, Rorty, Lasch.” In other words, he is a man of impeccable
left-wing politics, a refusal to believe in any philosophical verities,
and a deep skepticism about the benefits of Enlightenment progress. This
is not exactly a popular combination — surely Chomsky and Ehrenreich
have more fans than Rorty and Lasch — but it is a provocative one. And
Scialabba’s genius is that he can make such counterintuitive ideas,
expressed by such Olympian intellectuals, seem not just clear but common
sense. A dedicated follower of the left-rationalist-progressive
tradition, I had to continually catch myself from nodding along in
agreement.

Recommended for anyone who’s a fan of the Intellectual Scene and the men
and women who inhabit it.

*Disclosure:* Scialabba sent me an inscribed copy of the book.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0978515668)
-   **Wednesday:** [Reading at the Harvard Book
    Store](http://www.harvard.com/events/press_release.php?id=2253)
-   [Scialabba’s web site](http://www.georgescialabba.net/)



A Non-Local Revolution
======================

April 15, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nonlocal)

* * * * *

Paul Graham has recently argued for two points: first, that tech
startups will [continue to collect in Silicon
Valley](http://www.paulgraham.com/startuphubs.html). Second, that
startups may represent [a new economic
phase](http://www.paulgraham.com/highres.html), replacing the [corporate
ladder of old](http://www.paulgraham.com/ladder.html). Now he’s
suggesting that these two effects combined might lead to [a very local
economic revolution](http://www.paulgraham.com/revolution.html).

The first point — that tech startups collect in Silicon Valley — is
certainly true, just like car companies all tend to cluster in Detroit.
This is because of a feedback effect set off by some random initial
condition: Shockley Semiconductor was started in Silicon Valley, so when
its employees left to start their own companies they did so there, and
so on. Now everyone in the industry moves to Silicon Valley because
that’s where everyone else is.

This isn’t a new idea; it was a central topic in Paul Krugman’s
research, for example, and even before that you can see similar ideas
expressed by social theorists like Jane Jacobs. (For more information,
see the Wikipedia article [Business
cluster](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_cluster), Krugman’s
*Geography and Trade*, and Jacobs’ brilliant book *The Economy of
Cities*.) Industries tend to cluster together.

The second — that startups represent a new economic phase — may also be
true. It’s a rather more extreme claim, but it would be pretty cool.

But I don’t think it combines with the first to create a local
revolution. It’s true, tech startups have generated a lot of wealth, but
they’re far from the only kind of startup to do so. The amazing thing
about the Internet is that it makes all sorts of startups possible.

Previously, if you wanted to start a newspaper, you had to buy a
building and hire a staff and get some printing presses and a delivery
service and an ad sales team and access to the wire services. Now you
just start a blog, read the wire services online, and link to the
stories you like.

Previously, if you wanted to sell a new kind of soap, you had to build
warehouses and a distribution network and a shipping infrastructure and
make deals with retail outlets. Now you have [Amazon Fulfillment
Services](http://www.amazonservices.com/content/fulfillment-by-amazon.htm)
handle all the physical details and just advertise your product on the
Web.

And new startups are helping this process along all the time. One Y
Combinator startup tries to make things easier for food producers,
another helps you run an online magazine. More are surely close behind.

It’s tempting to think that a soap company which only sold through the
Internet would always be a small concern. But why should it be any
different from Internet companies? Reddit was small when it started, but
it quickly grew through word-of-mouth. Sure, we had some tough nights
making things scale, but in the end we were able to ramp up to a site
with millions of users.

Similarly, I met [some folks in Brooklyn who started a small salsa
company](http://bksalsa.com/) in their apartment. At first they made the
salsa in their kitchen and sold jars through their bedroom window. As
business picked up, they got a bigger space and started selling more.
Now they’re manufacturing in scale and you can find them at Whole Foods.
This worked because New York City was a big enough audience that they
had room to scale up. The Internet is big in exactly the same way.

As the Internet is everywhere and everyone knows how to use it, why
won’t we see online startups in every industry? And then why not all
across the globe? It may make sense for tech startups to move to Silicon
Valley, but does it really make sense for soap startups? For food
startups? No, it seems more likely that each industry will cluster the
way tech companies and car companies have.

Silicon Valley may have had the first wave, but the next one belongs to
the world.


Transparency is Bunk
====================

April 23, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/transparencybunk)

* * * * *

*Adapted from an impromptu rant I gave to some people interested in
funding government transparency projects.*

I’ve spent the past year and change working on a site, watchdog.net,
that publishes government information online. In doing that, I’ve
learned a lot: I’ve looked at everything from pollution records to voter
registration databases and I’ve figured out a number of bureacratic
tricks to get information out of the government. But I’ve also become
increasingly skeptical of the transparency project in general, at least
as it’s carried out in the US.

The way a typical US transparency project works is pretty simple. You
find a government database, work hard to get or parse a copy, and then
put it online with some nice visualizations.

The problem is that reality doesn’t live in the databases. Instead, the
databases that are made available, even if grudgingly, form a kind of
official cover story, a veil of lies over the real workings of
government. If you visit a site like GovTrack, which publishes
information on what Congresspeople are up to, you find that all of
Congress’s votes are on inane items like declaring holidays and naming
post offices. The real action is buried in obscure subchapters of
innocuous-sounding bills and voted on under emergency provisions that
let everything happen without public disclosure.

So government transparency sites end up having three possible effects.
The vast majority of them simply promote these official cover stories,
misleading the public about what’s really going on. The unusually
cutting ones simply make plain the mindnumbing universality of waste and
corruption, and thus promote apathy. And on very rare occasions you have
a “success”: an extreme case is located through your work, brought to
justice, and then everyone goes home thinking the problem has been
solved, as the real corruption continues on as before.

In short, the generous impulses behind transparency sites end up doing
more harm than good.

But this is nothing new. The whole [history of the “good government”
movement](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html) in
the US is of “reformers” who, intentionally or otherwise, weakened the
cause of democracy. They too were primarily supported by large
foundations, mostly Ford and Rockefeller. They replaced
democratically-elected mayors with professional city managers, which
required a supermajority to overrule. They insisted on nonpartisan
elections, making it difficult to organize people into political blocs.
Arguing it would reduce corruption, they insisted city politicians serve
without paying, ensuring the jobs were only open to the wealthy.

I worry that transparency groups may be making the same “mistake”.

These are some dark thoughts, so I want to add a helpful alternative:
journalism. Investigative journalism lives up to the promise that
transparency sites make. Let me give three examples: Silverstein,
Taibbi, Caro.

[Ken Silverstein](http://www.harpers.org/subjects/KenSilverstein)
regularly writes brilliant pieces about the influence of money in
politics. And he uses these sorts of databases to do so. But the
databases are always a small part of a larger picture, supplemented with
interviews, documents, and even undercover investigation — he recently
did a piece where he posted as a representative of the government of
Turkmenistan and described how he was wined and dined by lobbyists eager
to build support for that noxious regime. The story, and much more, is
told in his book
*[Turkmeniscam](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140006743X)*. (His book
*[Washington Babylon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1859840922)* is
similarly indispensible.)

Matt Taibbi, in his book *[The Great
Derangement](http://books.theinfo.org/go/038552062X)*, describes how
Congress really works. He goes to the capitol and lays out the whole
scene: the Congressmen naming post offices on the House floor, the
journalists typing in the press releases they’re handed, the key actions
going on behind the scenes and out of the public eye, the continual use
of emergency procedures to evade disclosure laws.

And Robert Caro, in his incredible book *[The Power
Broker](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245)* (one of the very best
books ever published, I’m convinced) takes on this fundamental political
question of “Who’s actually responsible for what my government is
doing?” For forty years, everyone in New York thought they knew the
answer: power was held by the city council, the mayor, the state
legislature, and the governor. After all, they run the government,
right?

And for forty years, they were all wrong. Power was held — held, for the
most part, *absolutely*, without any checks or outside influence — by
one man: Parks Commissioner Robert Moses. All that time, everyone
(especially the press) treated Robert Moses as merely the Parks
Commissioner, a mere public servant serving his elected officials. In
reality, he pulled the strings of all those elected officials.

These journalists tackled all the major questions supposedly addressed
by US transparency sites — who’s buying influence? what is Congress
doing? who’s in power in my neighborhood? — and not only tell a richer,
more informative story, but come to strikingly different answers to the
questions. In this era where investigative reporting budgets have been
cut to the bone and newspapers are folding left and right, it’s fallen
to nonprofits like ProPublica and the Center for Independent Media and,
from a previous era, the Center for Public Integrity, to pick up the
slack. They’ve been using the Internet in innovative ways to supplement
good old-fashioned narrative journalism, where transparency sites are a
supplement, rather than an end-in-themselves.

For too long we’ve been funding transparency projects on the model of
if-we-build-it-they-will-come: that we don’t know what transparency will
be useful for, but once it’s done it will lead to all sorts of exciting
possibilities. Well, we’ve built it. And they haven’t come. The only
success story its proponents can point to is that transparency projects
have bred even more transparency projects. I’m done working on
watchdog.net; I’m done hurting America. It’s time to give old-fashioned
narrative journalism a try.

*Previously:* [Disinfecting the Sunlight
Foundation](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dissunlight) [November 2006]


Investigative Strike Teams
==========================

April 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ist)

* * * * *

Journalists get mad at bloggers: “Without real reporting, they’d have
nothing to comment on!” Bloggers get mad at journalists: “There’s a
reason nobody reads newspapers anymore. They’re dry and dull and wrong.”
But the gap is shrinking: bloggers are doing more real reporting,
journalists are getting more humanized (with all the digressions,
opinions, and biases that entails).

So what if you paired an investigative reporter with a blogger?
Reporters didn’t used to write their own stories. (Why would a good
investigator be a good writer?) The reporter would be out in the field,
knocking on doors and taking notes, which they’d hand to a writer at a
desk, who would turn them into a coherent, vivid story. (*Newsweek*
still operates this way.)

Replace the writer with a blogger. They’d post the story as it unfolded,
capturing the excitement of discovery: the big breaks, the wrong turns,
the moment when it all comes together. Like any talented blogger, they’d
keep people coming back: *What happens next? I want to know more!*
They’d keep up a conversation with readers and other bloggers, sharing
new leads with the reporter. It’d be a powerful duo.

But blogging isn’t everything. You also want to recap the story so far:
for those just tuning in, here are the characters, here’s what’s
happened, here’s why it’s important. Keep a summary article alongside
the blog and update it in tandem. It would lay out the whole story in
one place, with links to particular posts or source documents for more
information. That way everyone can always get an overview of the bigger
picture — including the reporters.

You’ll also want a tech person around to help out. Many stories involve
databases; you need someone to work with the reporter to parse and
process the data, then work with the blogger to put the results online.
And there are plenty of other times where a small program or some tech
knowledge comes in handy.

And you’ll need a lawyer on staff. Getting information isn’t easy.
You’ll need someone who can file FOIA lawsuits and respond to legal
threats. Maybe you can even file lawsuits against corporate malefactors
and obtain documents in discovery. Then work with *pro bono* lawyers or
public interest law firms to win the lawsuit in its own right.

Lawsuits are needed because modern investigations can’t stop at
publication. If there was an era when a front page *Times* story could
stop a scandal, that era is over. Ending abuses requires action. This
makes traditional journalists uncomfortable. They see their job as
reporting the facts, not changing them.

We may always need the detached journalist interested only in The Truth,
but there’s room for more. Just as journalism needs to become more
humanized, it needs to become more activist. Journalists uncover
outrageous things, which gets people outraged, but they seem to think
channeling that outrage into something productive is someone else’s
responsibility.

Instead, a good investigative team needs a political organizer. They can
build an email list of people who get outraged by their reporting and
use it, along with blogs and the lists of other political groups, to put
pressure on the bad guys, fundraise for further journalism, and collect
a team of volunteers. The volunteers can help with aspects of the
reporting — a modern investigation can get much further by crowdsourcing
certain tricky aspects and depending on talented volunteers for
particular tasks. A good political organizer knows how to get and manage
volunteers.

But to make your organizing maximally effective, you’ll need (gasp!) a
lobbyist. They’ll meet with representatives to encourage them to hold
hearings based on stories you’re working on, where they can subpoena
documents and testimony. They’ll ask representatives to introduce bills
to address the abuses you’ve uncovered and work with them on legislative
strategy to get those bills passed. And they’ll team up with the
political organizer to get constituents writing to their representatives
in favor of these bills.

The only way to get good at something is deliberate practice: trying
various things and seeing how they work. But when it comes to making
change, that’s very hard to do. Change requires so many people and takes
so long that it’s almost impossible to say for sure that your doing X
helped accomplish Y. Which means that it becomes very easy to fool
yourself into thinking you’re more effective than you are.

But if you have one team — some reporters, a blogger/writer, a techie, a
lawyer, an organizer, and a lobbyist — together, they form an
investigative strike team: uncovering corruption, exposing it, and
effecting change. They can watch the whole process unfold from a
reporter’s suspicion to a writer’s story to a legislative fix. And they
can get better at it. It’d be a powerful combination. That’s the kind of
future-of-news that I want to see.


A New Kind of Writing?
======================

May 5, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nkw)

* * * * *

There are two kinds of nonfiction: *science writing* and *journalism*.
Science writing is when you’re trying to explain an idea. You have a
concept in your head and you try to get it across. There are lots of
tools you can use to do this: you can give an example, you can tell the
story of how you thought of it, you can draw a picture. But the concept
is the important thing.

In journalism, you’re telling a story. Someone did one thing, which led
to something else, which led to this other thing. Occasionally you pause
to take a step back and make some larger point: the story might have
some moral or illustrate some larger principle or lead you to a
conclusion. But the important thing is always the story.

Of course, this is how science advances. Something weird happened over
here, so we measured it carefully and took detailed notes. (These are
the experimentalists.) When you put all these weird things together,
they kind of fit a larger pattern. (These are the theorists.) The theory
then leads to more experiments and the new experiments lead to more
theory. You inch forward, bouncing between experiment and theory,
journalism and science writing, to a larger understanding of the world.

But, of course, just as science requires both, the best science writing
requires both. This is what makes *This American Life*’s show “[The
Giant Pool of
Money](http://www.thislife.org/Radio_Episode.aspx?episode=355)” still so
unsurpassedly brilliant. It took a question everyone wanted to know the
answer to — why did the economy melt down? — and explained it not by
just illustrating the concepts, as many science writers did, or just
telling stories of the people involved, as journalists did, but by doing
*both*, moving between the two modes so you could understand not just
the theory but how it worked.

It seems like an obvious idea, especially when you lay it out this way,
but I really can’t think of any other good examples. Take three of my
very favorite books: Robert Jackall’s *Moral Mazes*, Robert Karen’s
*Becoming Attached*, and William Foote Whyte’s \_Street Corner
Society\_^[1](#fn:fn1)^. All are absolutely brilliant, among the best
examples of the genre while conveying facts of incredible importance.
Jackall is very cinematic: his book consists of well-chosen scenes and
all the theory comes in the cuts between them. (As soon as I finished
reading it, I wanted to turn it into a movie.) But the two — scenes and
theory — exist in a weird sort of balance. Neither of them (with a few
exceptions) really take over and drive the work the way both do in “The
Giant Pool of Money” but instead they water each other down: the scenes
are always illustrating a theory and the theory consists largely of
scenes.

Karen embeds the theory within his story by telling the story of the
theory’s development. Because he does this without condescension, it’s
as good an introduction to the science as can be imagined. It’s a very
clever technique, and a very powerful one (I certainly wouldn’t change
it), but it’s a different one and doesn’t have the same power.

Whyte, by contrast, spends his book telling the story of one example.
From it, he draws out all the important theoretical principles
(basically inventing every major branch of sociology for the next
century) but the theory is always illustrating his one story, just as
Jackall’s scenes are always illustrating his theory.

Malcolm Gladwell probably comes closest to a genuine mixture of the two,
but his work is marred by the fact that he kind of makes up all his
science. His stories are never illustrating some established scientific
principle or even a new one he has that he wants to stand up to
scrutiny, but instead his principles are always invented *ad hoc* to
serve his stories, with the same fidelity a typical *This American Life*
episode has to its theme. As [Ira Glass
comments](http://us.penguingroup.com/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9781594482670,00.html?sym=EXC)
on “[Six Degrees of Lois
Weisberg](http://www.gladwell.com/1999/1999_01_11_a_weisberg.htm)”: “the
article could be half the length and still hit all its big ideas, and
it’s only longer because Gladwell has found so many things that interest
and amuse him, and that’s the engine that drives the whole enterprise. …
pretty much everything in the story after section five is, to my way of
thinking, just there for fun.”

As I’ve hinted at before, I’m hard at work on a book of my own, and of
course I plan to write it this way. But surely I can’t be the first.
Anyone else have any good examples?

**UPDATE:** I’d forgotten how good a book *Fast Food Nation* is. It
follows almost exactly this style. In general, it seems larger books
written by magazine writers might, since magazine articles (story,
story, moment of reflection) are the building blocks of the form, but
I’m still having trouble thinking of other examples. *Outliers* is
*much* better than the other Gladwell books on this front.

* * * * *

1.  I wanted to say Robert Caro’s *The Power Broker* for the
    alliteration, but Whyte really is a better example because he
    doesn’t study an extreme outlier. [↩](#fnref:fn1)




How Policy Gets Made: A Primer
==============================

May 17, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/policyprimer)

* * * * *

Barack Obama’s campaign was a model of efficiency and foresightedness.
Bill Clinton treated his campaign plans like marketing documents,
poll-testing each proposed new idea, and forcing his administration to
only begin seriously thinking about what to do once they were in office.
Obama, by contrast, started early and put together a series of policy
teams even before the campaign had begun in earnest.

Each policy team had a different subject — technology, health care,
foreign policy — and was led by a top ally or fundraiser in the field.
Let’s take technology, since it’s the case I’m most familiar with.
Julius Genachowski was named Chairman of the Technology, Media and
Telecommunications policy working group. Genachowski was a Harvard Law
School classmate of Obama’s who had gone on to become a chief executive
at Barry Diller’s IAC/InterActiveCorp (market cap: \$2.1 billion). He
went on to become a venture capitalist and sit on the board of numerous
technology companies.

He used his wealth ([annual
income](http://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2009/04/01/fcc-nominee-to-take-a-big-paycut/):
\$1.6 million) and influence to become the leading Silicon Valley
fundraiser for his old classmate — indeed, one of Obama’s top
fundraisers nationally. As a result, he was the obvious pick to define
Obama’s technology policy. Genachowski canvassed his fellow Silicon
Valley business leaders for policy suggestions and his team synthesized
the results into proposed policy documents. These proposals were
circulated among a wider circle for further comments before being
published on the campaign website.

After the election was won, the teams were reassembled as transition
teams. Genachowski was again leading the technology team, now named the
Technology, Innovation & Government Reform Policy Working Group (TIGR).
It was staffed by old government hands, like Thomas Kalil (Deputy
Assistant to President Clinton for Technology and Economic Policy, rode
out the Bush years as Special Assistant to the Chancellor for Science
and Technology at UC Berkeley). Also brought out were business leaders,
like Andrew McLaughlin (Head of Global Public Policy and Government
Affairs for Google), and business-affiliated academic experts, like
Susan Crawford (UMich law professor and a former partner at a DC law
firm).

The teams worked on converting the policy documents from the campaign
into instructions that would be given to federal agencies or executive
orders the President could sign. They fleshed out campaign proposals,
interviewed potential candidates for government positions, and held
audiences with various interest groups. I visited DC during this period
and got to see the aforementioned names at DC cocktail parties or the
diner outside transition headquarters that became the informal
meeting-place of the team. “It’s the hardest I’ve ever worked in my
life,” Susan Crawford told me, clearly relishing the challenge.

After the inauguration, the teams disbanded and their members either
returned to private life or were named to the administration.
Genachowski, who obviously had his pick of positions, was named chairman
of the Federal Communications Commission. Thomas Kalil became Associate
Director of Science and Technology Policy. Susan Crawford became Special
Assistant to the President for Science, Technology, and Innovation
Policy. McLaughlin went back to work at Google, where his connections to
the new administration are no doubt invaluable.

**UPDATE:** [McLaughlin was named Deptuy
CTO](http://www.informationweek.com/news/government/federal/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=217700899)


A Life Offline
==============

May 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/offline)

* * * * *

I have literally had a computer since birth; the Internet came not long
after that: I still remember email addresses supplemented by UUCP
bang-paths. Hardly a day has gone by in which I haven’t checked my email
for what must be a decade.

The Internet has kept me connected to people—as a child, all my best
friends were online; as an adult, all my coworkers are. My jobs do not
take place in an office; they take place over email, where time and
place do not matter. The upside, is that I can go anywhere and still do
them. The downside, is I cannot get away from them.

I need to take a break. My life has become entangled with technology and
pressure that I hardly know any other way of life. So I’m planning to
spend the month of June (June 6 to July 4, to be exact) offline. I’m
packing up the laptop and the cable modem and sending them someplace far
away. I’m going back to the world of paper and books.

Of course, my phone is now a computer too, so that will also have to go.
I don’t have a landline, so if folks want to talk to me they’ll have to
write letters ([here’s my address](http://www.aaronsw.com/contact)). I
(amazingly) don’t have any clocks or calendars, so I won’t even know
what time it is. All of which means no more meetings or coordinating to
hang out with people. I suppose people could call on me, but honestly, I
wish they wouldn’t — at least at first.

I don’t feel like the kind of person who could survive on Walden Pond —
I’m a finicky eater and not a huge fan of animals in any capacity. So
locking myself in my apartment seems about as close as I can get. There
will of course be the clerks at stores and people on the street, but for
the most part I’ll be alone.

I’ve experimented with it a little — both my phone and my laptop have
died recently — and it’s liberating. Walking down the street or waiting
in lines, I find myself checking my phone compulsively, using it to send
my mind to some other world of email or news. Without it, I feel
grounded. And my laptop is even worse — a beckoning world of IMs to
friends, [brain-gelatinizing television
shows](http://www.hulu.com/watch/58538/), and an endless pile of emails
to answer. It’s like a constant stream of depression. A day without it
made me feel like I was human again.

I want to be human again. Even if that means isolating myself from the
rest of you humans.

What if there’s an emergency? Has there ever been an emergency? The
biggest urgent things seem to be that my servers go down. Which sucks,
but I need to be able to walk away from that. If you have things hosted
on one of my machines, contact me now and I’ll try to get you enough
privileges that you can fix things if they break. If something’s really
an emergency, I’m sure you’ll find me.

Have a nice June.


This Month in Sociology
=======================

May 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/socmon)

* * * * *

*based on [Contexts’ sociology
roundup](http://caliber.ucpress.net/doi/abs/10.1525/ctx.2009.8.2.8)*

A new study finds that marriage has been making people increasingly
unhappy for the past 30 years. Even when they say they’re happy with
their relationship, married people are unhappier overall. Indeed, the
effect is so large that it cancels out the happiness gains the unmarried
population has made in the past 30 years.

Meanwhile, in Portugal the police have been arresting whole
neighborhoods and transporting them all to jail. Now prisoners can serve
with their old family and friends.

Rich countries tend to be more accepting of minorities, while most
strippers have terrible working conditions. Moving increases crime, the
DUI gender gap is narrowing, and media coverage encourages sports
hooligans. Young people are increasingly critical of war.

Blacks are moving back to the south, while dual citizenship is
increasingly permitted. Ugandans educated at foreign colleges and
universities are twice as likely to be employed as equally-educated
Ugandans who never left and three times as likely to be employed as
foreign-born immigrants.

Appalachian boys prefer working with their hands to booksmarts.

*with apologies to [Paul
Ford](http://www.harpers.org/subjects/WeeklyReview) and Roger Hodge*


Namedropping
============

July 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/namedropping)

* * * * *

I was having tea the other day with Nancy Pelosi, when she got a call
from her good friend Tom Hanks. Tom wanted to tell her about how he’d
been out with his favorite shopping partner, Paris Hilton, when Paris
accidentally swung a bag of clothes into the face of her aide, Ken
Burns. Ken, of course, was already feeling bad after losing his
therapist, Warren Buffett. He had to fire him after Warren kept spending
their sessions raving about his new chef, Frank Gehry. Frank, you know,
always left work in a towering rage, going home to scream obscenities at
his housekeeper, Thomas Friedman. Last time Thomas took it out on a cab
driver, Woody Allen. Woody spent the rest of the day feeling dejected
until, on his way home, he was approached by Richard Posner, covered in
rags and begging for spare change.


My Life Offline
===============

July 24, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/offline2)

* * * * *

Everyone wants to know how my month offline was. They ask it casually,
like “How’s work going?” or “What’d you do this weekend?” But it’s not a
casual question. It was a huge, incredible, transformative experience.
Those 30 days felt like six months. My habits changed, my relationships
changed, my identity changed, my personality changed — hell, the
physical shape of my body changed dramatically. I went through four
legal pads trying to describe what it was like. I’m still not sure I
really know.

One thing is clear, though: my normal life style isn’t healthy. This
doesn’t seem like the kind of thing that requires a break to learn. I
imagine people with unhealthy lifestyles *know* they’re unhealthy. They
come home after work and say “I can’t go on like this,” they cry
randomly in elevators. But I didn’t know. Life online is practically the
only life I know. Sure, I guess things were different when I was very
young — I remember, after getting my first email account, wishing
someone would email me so I’d have an email to answer (even then I knew
I’d soon be missing those empty-inbox days) — but for most of my life,
this has been it: a jumble of interruptions and requests and jobs and
people, largely carried out alone. It never let up, so I never saw
anything different. How was I to know there was anything wrong?

But the last few weeks have made it clear there was — is. These weeks
haven’t felt that different my other weeks online, really — same jumble
of work and people and interruptions as always. The usual sense that I’m
never really *here*, I’m always worried about the million things around
the corner: a todo list that goes for pages, a thousand emails to
respond to, hundreds of blog posts to read, twenty open tabs, a dozen IM
windows, a text message to answer, a Twitter stream to catch up on. I
never used to think about these things as a benefit *or* a distraction —
I didn’t think about them at all; they were just how life online was.
This was the era of multitasking and I was its child. If I felt anything
about it, it was pride — a kind of joy in (mostly) managing to handle a
thousand different things thrown my way at once. But I never knew what
life was like when things *weren’t* constantly being thrown at you.
Until it stopped, I never knew how awful it really was.

I am not happy. I used to think of myself as just an unhappy person: a
misanthrope, prone to mood swings and eating binges, who spends his days
moping around the house in his pajamas, too shy and sad to step outside.
But that’s not how I was offline. I loved people — everyone from the
counter clerk to the old friends I bumped into on the street. And I
loved to go for walks and exercise in the gym and — even though there
was no one around to see me — groom. Yes, groom: shower and shave and
put on nice clothes and comb my hair and clean up my nails and so on,
all things a month ago I would have said went against my very nature,
things I never did before *voluntarily*.

But most of all, I felt not just happy, but firmly happy — solid, is the
best way I can put it. I felt like I was in control of my life instead
of the other way around, like its challenges just bounced off me as I
kept doing what I wanted. Normally I feel buffeted by events, a thousand
tiny distractions nagging at the back of my head at all times. Offline,
I felt in control of my own destiny. I felt, yes, serene.

When I was very young, my parents introduced me to a book called
*[Flow](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0061339202)*. It argued that people
good at their jobs went into a sort of flow state — they were “in the
zone” — where the normal stress of the world faded away and all their
concentration was focused on the task at hand. It wasn’t “fun” the way
ice cream or sex is fun — it didn’t make you smile, just look grimly
determined — but it was somehow more than that. It was *fulfilling*. And
that was even better than a smile.

I go into such states when programming or writing and they are indeed
fantastic, but also weirdly hollow. When you come out the real world —
with its mundane stresses and distractions — comes crashing back in, and
the moment of flow seems like just another temporary escape, an elusive
dream. And it’s a hard one to get back.

I still had flow states while offline — stronger than ever, in fact: I
spent an ecstatic afternoon and evening writing longhand in a trance,
pouring out the first forty pages of the book I’ve been researching;
afterward, I was on a bigger high than I’ve ever had in my life — but
they didn’t feel like escapes. Normal days weren’t painful anymore. I
didn’t spend them filled with worry, like before. Offline, I felt solid
and composed. Online, I feel like my brain wants to run off in a million
different directions, even when I try to point it forward.

A friend asked me if I knew I was privileged to be able to take such a
break. It seemed a silly question: I feel privileged every day. As I
write, my best friend is broke and homeless, much of the world struggles
just to stay alive. I feel privileged to own a mattress, let alone take
a break.

I realize everyone’s lives are filled with work and people and
distractions — the situation brewing at the office, the sump pump
breaking down at the house, the family member who’s fallen ill. I
realize it must seem like the greatest arrogance to think one could
escape life’s mundane concerns, like asking to live on a cloud, floating
above the mere mortals. But it was that arrogance that made me think I
could contribute to adult mailing lists when I was still in elementary
school, that arrogance that made me think someone might want to read my
website when I was still just a teen, that arrogance that had me start a
company as a college freshman. That sort of arrogance — not bragging,
but simply inwardly thinking I could do more than was expected of me —
is the only thing that’s gotten me anywhere in life. I see no reason to
stop now.

I don’t know how I’m going to carve a life away from the world’s
constant demands and distractions. I don’t know how I’m going to balance
all the things I want to do with the pressures and responsibilities they
bring. But after my month off, I do know one thing: I can’t go on like
this. So I’m damn well going to try.


Writing a Book: Part One (Ambition)
===================================

July 27, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bookwriting1)

* * * * *

So I’m writing a book. In some sense, this is nothing new. I’ve wanted
to write a book since I was probably five and since then I must have
started seriously writing drafts of half a dozen, before abandoning
them. But this one feels different somehow. I really think I’m going to
finish it.

I don’t want to say what it’s about publicly yet (hint: it has to do
with politics), but it’s ambitious — perhaps ridiculously so; when I
tell people at parties about it they look at me as if trying to
determine whether I’ve gone mad. My goals for it are ambitious too: I
want it to be popular (how hard is it to be a ‘national bestseller’?), I
want it to be great writing (accurate, nuanced, and hard-to-put-down),
and I want it to make a difference (get people organized, change
government policy). Oh, come on. Now *you’re* giving me that look.

I suppose most authors want these things, but it doesn’t seem like they
try particularly hard. And in a way that’s understandable: writing 300
coherent pages is hard enough — why add all these additional
requirements? But I have high standards for books. (I’m almost always
disappointed.) I figure the least I can do is try my best to live up to
them myself.

Just as I’ve always wanted to write a book, I’ve always wondered how you
write one. The problem is that the kind of people who would write books
on how they write books are usually pretty dreadful writers and I can’t
stand their poor writing, let alone their sense of superiority. (This is
why I kept throwing *On Writing Well* against the wall.) But I’ve never
written a book before, so I don’t feel superior, and I’m at least trying
to be a great writer. So for people in the same boat, I thought I’d
write about what it’s like.

* * * * *

It started with an email. I’d written a blog post on management that had
gotten some attention, including a link from the famed Jason Kottke.
Apparently the New York literati all read Jason’s blog, because an
editor at a publishing house followed the link and read my piece and
thought it might make a decent book. He worked for the business book
imprint of a major-name publisher and invited me to give him a call and
discuss the idea further.

Normally when I come up with book ideas, I don’t tell more than a couple
people about them. I’ve certainly never talked to anyone at a major-name
publisher before. So getting this email was thrilling. I’d always
imagined I’d have to pitch my book to publishers someday, but now
publishers were coming to *me*, and asking for a book! It gave the whole
thing a seriousness those other book projects lacked.

I told him I was heading to New York soon and he invited me to lunch at
the Knickerbocker. It was the kind of place you imagine New York
businesspeople meet for lunch: guys in suits, wood-paneled walls, I
think I might have even spotted a cigar.

The editor was very excited and encouraging, but as we talked I grew
increasingly discouraged. I began to remember how much I hate business
books with a passion, how ridiculously dumb and faddish they are. For
his part, the editor complained about how the rest of the world didn’t
take business books seriously. They sold ten times better than normal
books, he said, but the *New York Times* refuses to list any of them on
their prestigious nonfiction bestseller list (there’s a special section
just for business bestsellers that’s only published monthly and buried
away).

Furthermore, the books are apparently sold in the most degrading ways —
motivational talks at the Learning Annex were mentioned. I’d always
imagined myself as more of a *Charlie Rose* guy. I wanted to write a
bestseller, it was true, but mostly for the respect, not the money. For
the people I hang out with, I suspect writing a bestselling business
book would bring me only ridicule.

Afterward I met with a prominent book agent that my friend introduced me
to — apparently one of the town’s top ten. She was brilliant and
enthusiastic and full of energy. Spending an hour batting around ideas
with her was lots of fun. Her shelves were lined with the famous books
her authors had published and I began to dream about a future among
those names.

But that was just the intro, for the details she handed me off to an
associate, who explained the next step was to turn my idea into a rough
outline. So I went back to where I was staying and tried to do just
that. But I just couldn’t. I went for walks, I pounded my head against
the desk, I tried moving words around on the screen, but I couldn’t seem
to find a way to make the business book idea make sense. The fundamental
problem was simple: who would take business advice from a teenager?

As I was working on it, another idea (we’ll call it the politics book)
began nagging at the back of my head. I tried not to think of it, but it
wouldn’t go away. The more I told it to bug off, the louder it nagged.
Finally, I decided I would get the business book out of the way quickly
and then do the politics one. But as my idea for the business book fell
apart in my hands, the plan for the politics book grew clearer and
clearer. I began talking about it, getting excited about it, even doing
a whole outline for it. It seemed so perfect, so *right*. Finally, my
girlfriend asked why I didn’t just do that book instead.

The associate agent was tepid (I guess politics books don’t sell as
well), but intrigued enough to suggest I pursue it. He said the next
step was to work on expanding my description of the introduction. And
somehow I got it in my head that the best way to do this would be to
just try and write it.

Which meant I needed to figure out how to write.


The Median Voter and the Mixed Voter
====================================

July 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/medianvoter)

* * * * *

Our minds work by making models of the world and using them to predict
how things will happen. These models are powerful because they’re so
deeply-ingrained we don’t even realize we’re using them. They just seem
like “common sense.” In politics, there are two major models for how
voters think, which I’ll call the median voter model and the mixed voter
model.

The median voter model says that politics lives on a line from left to
right. Voters are scattered across this line and vote for the politician
that’s closest to them on it. Politicians get elected by “positioning”
themselves closest to the most voters, which usually means in the
“center” of the line.

There are some complications, though. Because primary voters tend to be
“more extreme” (i.e. Democratic primary voters are all on the left,
Republicans on the right), politicians take a more extreme tack during
the primaries, before heading back to the center for the general. And
because they don’t want to seem like flip-floppers, they’re somewhat
constrained by the primary positions they take.

But, in general, this model is pretty widely-accepted in politics. So
widely that it’s not even thought of as a model — it’s implicitly
assumed by all the things political commentators say. Comments like
“He’s moving to the center to pick up votes,” “[X] couldn’t get elected
in that district, so how is someone more extreme going to make it?” only
make sense because we all have this model in our heads.

But, while I haven’t studied the question in detail, there doesn’t seem
to be much evidence for this model. Even intuitively, it doesn’t make
sense: does the average person really develop a location on a
one-dimensional issue spectrum and then figure out where various
politicians stand on that same spectrum? The notion seems almost
ridiculous.

**UPDATE:** Andrew Gelman has studied the question in detail, and
[concludes](http://www.themonkeycage.org/2009/11/politicians_have_a_lot_of_leew.html)
that the median voter theorem doesn’t seem to be true: “My research with
Jonathan Katz suggests that being a moderate is worth about 2% of the
vote in a congressional election: it ain’t nuthin’, but it certainly is
not a paramount concern for most representatives. … Incumbent
congressmembers almost always win reelection. And, when they don’t,
they’re often losing as part of a national swing (as in the 1994
Republican sweep or the 2006/2008 Democratic shift). And when an
incumbent does lose unexpectedly, it can be for something unrelated to
their votes (remember the “check kiting scandal” of 1992?).”

The mixed voter model, promoted by George Lakoff and most prominently
adopted by Howard Dean, says that voters aren’t rational, coherent
evaluators but a bundle of feelings, prejudices, and contradictions.
Politicians get elected by playing on the feelings voters already have
that would encourage a voter’s’ support. Thus, instead of moving to the
center to get more votes, Lakoff argued politicians should actually
become more extreme. Conservatives won votes by appealing to people’s
sense of order; liberals would have to respond by appealing to their
sense of empathy. Moving to the center by promoting a compromise
position that prevented rhetorical appeals of either type, was doomed.
This model was used to explain why radical conservative politicians kept
winning elections against moderate and centrist Democrats, when there
was no evidence of a conservative electorate.

This model makes much more sense to me, although again I haven’t seen
too much specific evidence for it. But it’s still pretty rare and seems
deeply-counterintuitive to most practitioners of politics. But whether
it’s right on the details or not, it’s clear that unless we evaluate and
question these models and think about them critically instead of just
assuming one is true, it’ll be hard to make much political progress.


Hot Girl Syndrome
=================

July 31, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hotgirlsyndrome)

* * * * *

One of the more thought-provoking CollegeHumor videos was their
(exaggerated) [attempt to imagine the inner life of an attractive
woman](http://www.collegehumor.com/video:1900432). One of the things it
makes clear is that being a hot girl means a constant stream of positive
feedback: guys turn to smile at you, they laugh loudly at all your
jokes, they’re always eager to do favors. The world just seems to bend
itself to your desires.

One might think that such a constant stream of positive attention would
make you particularly confident and resilient, but the human mind
doesn’t work that way; it adapts to its environment. Constant positive
attention doesn’t make you less dependent on praise any more than
constant eating makes you less dependent on food. When someone comes
along and says something mean, you don’t fall back on your years of
positive experiences and decide to ignore them. Instead, you’re so
shocked by the experience that you come away deeply wounded.

I think I first realized this when I visited a well-known author. He’d
written several highly-regarded books which received apparently
unanimous praise. If someone’s ever criticized him for something, I’ve
never seen it. Yet, when I saw him, he told me he’d been feeling down
for nearly a week. Why? Because a reader from Australia sent him a nasty
email. The endless praise hadn’t made him more resilient; it had made
him unusually vulnerable.

I think this explains why the pick-up artist’s technique of the “neg” —
a minor offhand insult intended to dent a girl’s self-esteem — is so
particularly effective, especially on unusually attractive women. For
people who aren’t used to being insulted, even a minor insult carries a
powerful sting. (A major insult would probably be too strong, though.
They’d be too hurt to want to even associate with you.)

Another thing made clear in the video is that bidding for a girl’s
affections is typically a kind dollar auction. A dollar auction is an
auction where both the highest bidder *and* the second-higest bidder
have to pay (even though only the highest bidder gets the prize).
Rational behavior in a dollar auction isn’t particularly clear — if
you’re the second-highest bidder, it always seems to make sense to bid a
little more, since you’ll lose the same amount of money but at least get
to take home the prize. But if you keep doing that, you soon find
yourself paying ridiculously large amounts for something you might not
even get.

With girls, there isn’t a formal auction, but instead guys bid by buying
her things, with no promise that they’ll get anything in return. Since
the things you’ve already spent so much, it always seems sensible to
spend a little more to get the girl. The result, from the girl’s
perspective, is that people are falling over themselves to buy you
things without you having to give them anything in return.

Perhaps the safest way to win a dollar auction is not to play at all.
And, indeed, this was [Richard Feynman’s surprising finding with women
as well](http://www.gorgorat.com/#35). He takes the advice of the bar’s
MC to refuse to buy girls anything until “you’ve *asked* her if she’ll
sleep with you, and you’re convinced that she *will*, and that she’s not
lying.” (Feynman is taken aback by the suggestion: “Uh… you mean… you
don’t… uh… you just *ask* them?”)

But it works, and no doubt Hot Girl Syndrome is part of the reason why.
When everyone is falling all over themselves for you, the only person
you have to impress is the one guy who isn’t.

The application to politics is left as an exercise for the reader.


Life in a World of Pervasive Immorality: The Ethics of Being Alive
==================================================================

August 2, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/immoral)

* * * * *

I used to think I was a pretty good person. I certainly didn’t kill
people, for example. But then Peter Singer pointed out that animals were
conscious and that eating them led them to be killed and that wasn’t all
that morally different from killing people after all. So I became a
vegetarian.

Again I thought I was a pretty good person. But then Arianna Huffington
told me that by driving in a car I was pouring toxic fumes into the air
and sending money to foreign dictatorships. So I got a bike instead.

But then I realized that my bike seat was sewn by children in foreign
sweatshops while its tubing was made by mining metals through ripping up
the earth. Indeed, any money I spent was likely to go to oppressing
people or destroying the planet in one way or another. And if I happen
to make money some of it goes to the government which spends it blowing
people up in Afghanistan or Iraq.

I thought about just living off of stuff I found in dumpsters, like some
friends. That way I wouldn’t be responsible for encouraging its
production. But then I realized that some people buy the things they
can’t find in dumpsters; if I got to the dumpster and took something
before they did, they might buy it instead.

The solution seemed clear: I’d have to go off-the-grid and live in a
cave, gathering nuts and berries. I’d still probably be exhaling CO2 and
using some of the products in the Earth, but probably only in levels
that were sustainable.

Perhaps you disagree with me that it’s morally wrong to kill animals or
blow up people in Afghanistan. But surely you can imagine that it
*might* be, or at least that someone could think it is. And I think it’s
similarly clear that eating a hamburger or paying taxes contributes — in
a very small way; perhaps only has the possibility of contributing — to
those things.

Even if you don’t, everyday life has a million ways that are more
direct. Personally, I think it’s wrong that I get to sit at a table and
gaily devour while someone else delivers more food to my table and a
third person slaves over a stove. Every time I order food, I make them
do more carrying and slaving. (Perhaps they get some money in return,
but surely they’d prefer it if I just gave them the money.) Again, you
may not think this wrong but I hope you can admit the possibility. And
it’s obviously my fault.

Off in the cave, I thought I was safe. But then I read [Peter Singer’s
latest book](http://www.thelifeyoucansave.com/). He points out that for
as little as a quarter, you can save a child’s life. (E.g. for 27 cents
you can buy the oral rehydration salts that will save a child from fatal
diarrhea.) Perhaps I was killing people after all.

I couldn’t morally make money, for the reasons described above.
(Although maybe it’s worth helping fund the bombing of children in
Afghanistan in order to help save children in Mozambique.) But instead
of living in a cave, I could go to Africa and volunteer my time.

Of course, if I do that there are a thousand other things I’m not doing.
How can I decide which action I take will save the most lives? Even if I
take the time to figuring out, that’s time I’m spending on myself
instead of saving lives.

It seems impossible to be moral. Not only does everything I do cause
great harm, but so does everything I don’t do. Standard accounts of
morality assume that it’s difficult, but attainable: don’t lie, don’t
cheat, don’t steal. But it seems like living a moral life isn’t even
possible.

But if morality is unattainable, surely I should simply do the best I
can. (Ought implies can, after all.) Peter Singer is a good utilitarian,
so perhaps I should try to maximize the good I do for the world. But
even this seems like an incredibly onerous standard. I should not just
stop eating meat, but animal products altogether. I shouldn’t just stop
buying factory-farmed food, I should stop buying altogether. I should
take things out of dumpsters other people are unlikely to be searching.
I should live someplace where others won’t be disturbed.

Of course all this worrying and stress is preventing me from doing any
good in the world. I can hardly take a step without thinking about who
it hurts. So I decide not to worry about the bad I might be doing and
just focus on doing good — screw the rules.

But this doesn’t just apply to the rules inspired by Peter Singer.
Waiting in line at the checkout counter is keeping me from my
life-saving work (and paying will cost me life-saving money) — better
just to shoplift. Lying, cheating, any crime can be similarly justified.

It seems paradoxical: in my quest to do good I’ve justified doing all
sorts of bad. Nobody questioned me when I went out and ordered a juicy
steak, but when I shoplift soda everyone recoils. Is there sense in
following their rules or are they just another example of the world’s
pervasive immorality? Have any philosophers considered this question?


Writing a Book: Part Two (Structure)
====================================

August 6, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bookwriting2)

* * * * *

I’ve always wanted to be a great writer, but nobody’s ever explained
how. So I tried to figure out for myself. I reread my favorite books, I
read just about [everything by David Foster
Wallace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/David_Foster_Wallace_nonfiction)
and [Robert Caro](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245), I read a lot
of *New Yorker* articles, I got caught up on
*[n+1](http://www.nplusonemag.com/)*. I read a lot of stuff out loud, to
get a feel for the sound of the voice. (I performed all the brief
interviews (including the powerful “On His Deathbed…”) in *[Brief
Interviews with Hideous
Men](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0316925195/booksinfo-20/ref=nosim/)*
— incredible fun; I can completely see why it made John Krasinski want
to become an actor.) In fact, it got to the point where I couldn’t
resist reading things out loud — some writing just begged to be
performed.

I read some writing guides, but none of them were very helpful. Virginia
Tufte’s *[Artful Sentences](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0961392185)* was
by far the most interesting, but I’m not sure it was much practical
help. I’ve had the best luck with just reading great writing and then
taking a stab of writing something of my own.

I also tried to figure out how to structure the writing. I watched Ira
Glass give his standard talk seven or eight different times, I read
Mamet’s *On Directing Film*, I sat down with Malcolm Gladwell’s
*Outliers* and tried to take it apart and figure out how it worked. For
some reason, even though the basic ideas are really simple, they’ve
taken me a really really long time to understand. It’s quite odd,
really. I saw Ira Glass say the same thing 8 times, but only on the 7th
time did I walk away going “Ohh, that’s what he means!” And I keep
having similar obvious epiphanies.

I think part of the problem is that I was around a lot of really bad
storytellers as a kid. My Dad would tell a joke and it would take so
long that I would be tearing my hair out with boredom halfway through.
When it was over I would think, “Wait, that was the joke? I can tell
that joke in two lines. What did he need all those details for?” And
since then I’ve basically been the person who tells jokes in two lines —
omitting needless words, using only the barest description, and getting
very impatient with people who run long (which was basically everyone,
it seemed to me).

I don’t know if I’ve begun reading better writers or grown more patient
with age, but I’m beginning to question this approach. Being spare and
interesting is better than being prolix and boring, I’m still convinced,
but there’s a place for the seemingly-irrelevant detail. For one thing,
what makes a story a story is the irrelevant detail. Ira Glass
demonstrates this by quoting the opening of his show
“[Cringe](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/Radio_Episode.aspx?sched=1134).”

(You can listen to it on the site there — just click “Full Episode” on
the left side. It’s the first three minutes. It’s much better listened
to, but if you can’t, here’s a transcript:)

> IRA: Joe worked at this office where, every now and then, the office
> manager would bring her nine-year-old to work. Good kid. Kind of
> tomboy-ish.
>
> > JOE: And she would just kind of help out around the office. She
> > would pass mail out. And over the time that I was there she and I
> > developed this really—this kind of teasing relationship: she would
> > come into my office and drop my mail off and stick her tongue at me
> > and I would sort of fake chase her down the hallway or something
> > and… you know.
> >
> > IRA: That’s sweet.
> >
> > JOE: Yeah, yeah. She was an incredibly sweet kid.
> >
> > [music (“[Elephant
> > Walk](http://westsounds.com/flash_track.php?trid=2964802&artist=Caleb%20Sampson&album=Fast%20Cheap%20and%20Out%20of%20Control%20OST&track=Elephant%20Walk)”)
> > begins]
> >
> > JOE: And so there’s this day when, it’s early in the morning, I’ve
> > arrived at the office, and I go into the bathroom, and when I come
> > out of the bathroom, I have my glasses in my shirt-pocket rather
> > than on my head. And I look down this hallway and I see this small
> > person walking towards me. And I then get down and start to
> > crab-walk towards her. So I sort of go down on my haunches, and put
> > my hands up as if they’re claws and kind of waddle—waddle towards
> > her…

“At this point,” Ira quips, “nobody turns off the radio.”

> > JOE: …and as I’m waddling towards her, I say, in this kind of creepy
> > voice, “Oh, no! I can’t believe *you’re* here today!” And then, at
> > that moment [laugh], as I say “today,” she comes into focus. And I
> > realize, in fact, it’s not at all the young girl who I thought it
> > was but in fact it’s one of our interns: a business intern, who is
> > a—a—a midget.
> >
> > [more music]
> >
> > JOE: And so she comes into focus and I see her and I’m horrified and
> > I go bolt upright and I stand up and I say “Oh, my god, I’m terribly
> > sorry, I thought you were somebody else.” And I think to myself: who
> > could she possibly think that someone else is?
> >
> > IRA: [laughs]
> >
> > JOE: [laughs] And I wondered at the time: Should I try to explain it
> > to her? It seems to me like one of those situations where it only
> > gets worse the more you try to explain it. The only thing I could
> > do, in fact, was apologize and end all contact with her, forever,
> > right there.
> >
> > IRA: [laughs]
> >
> > [music]
>
> IRA: Joel says the women was utterly gracious. She introduces herself,
> she tries to put him at ease. (Apparently, if you’re a midget, this
> sort of thing happens all the time.) But Joel says not only did he
> cringe when this happened, he cringes every time he tells this story.
> People cringe when they hear the story. And why? Seriously: why?

Yes, why? Not so much why do we cringe, but why do we listen so raptly?
As Ira Glass is the first to point out, it’s kind of a boring story on
its face. It takes him three minutes to tell, but I can tell it in two
lines: *A guy named Joe once mistook a midget for a nine-year-old. He
cringes every time he tells the story.* For the purposes of the show,
that’s all he needs to say — the purpose of the story is to set up a
show about cringing, and just the idea of mistaking a midget for a
nine-year-old is pretty cringeworthy. But he tells the story *at
length*: except for the very end, he doesn’t appear to try to summarize
it at all.

And yet, not only do people not get bored — this is apparently what
*keeps* them from getting bored. (Imagine how quickly people would tune
out a show of two-sentence stories. Personally, I don’t have to imagine
— I see how bored they look when I tell mine. Which, of course, only
makes me rush to tell them faster.) Glass argues that humans are somehow
hardwired for stories. Once they get started, we *have* to hear what
happened next. “One thing happens, and then another thing, and then
another thing,” he says. “It’s got its own momentum — it’s like a train
leaving the station.”

I think Ira is being too modest. He’s an incredibly gifted storyteller;
obviously one of the era’s greatest (his show is the \#1 podcast on
iTunes). What looks like a simple recording of someone telling a story
is the result of a thousand different questions and edits and
adjustments. There’s a lifetime of experience behind every pause, every
lilt of his cadence. To keep listeners hooked on a story is a very
difficult skill.

But what I didn’t realize was that it’s also a necessary one. Stories
that go by too fast may not be as annoying as stories that are too slow,
but they’re still flawed. I’m too insecure to think my storytelling
could possibly hold the listener’s attention, so I rush through the
story, hoping to tell them all the key facts before they get bored and
wander off. But it’s a self-fulfilling prophecy: if you seem
uninterested in your story, why should your listener be? If you’re going
to tell a story, you need to bite the bullet and be a storyteller.

The trick is realizing that the apparently-irrelevant details aren’t
actually irrelevant. Look again at my transcript of Joe’s story. There’s
only one thing I see in it that could be cut out: that “it’s early in
the morning.” Incredibly, every other line in that three-minute story
serves an important purpose.

Picking a sentence at random, “She was an incredibly sweet kid.” is
necessary because Ira’s comment “That’s sweet.” sounds odd by itself, it
needs a response. (Ira’s comment is necessary to make sure you see the
chasing-down-the-hallway in the right emotional tone. (That scene, in
turn, is necessary to explain the kind of relationship he and the girl
had, and so on.)) A three minute story, and there’s hardly a clause you
can cut.

* * * * *

That’s the first rule of storytelling: a story needs to be interesting
in its own right. But the second is equally important: the audience
needs a reason to care. I think part of the reason we’re wired to follow
stories is because a story carries an implied promise: there’s going to
be something good at the end of this.

The way Ira puts it is that there are two tools in storytelling: action,
and reflection. Ira’s shows (like Gladwell’s articles) open with action.
But the action leads immediately to reflection: look at the story above,
there’s not even a pause between the ending of the story and Ira asking
why it is that we cringe. Ira’s not just telling the story because it’s
entertaining, he’s telling it because it makes us cringe and he wants us
to think about that feeling.

He goes on to investigate that feeling — to explain what we can learn
from the story. And here again it’s important to slow down. There’s a
tendency to think that stories speak for themselves. First, because
there’s some artistic nobility in this: explaining what a story means is
being “didactic” and “preachy,” it’s keeping your readers from thinking
for themselves, it means your work isn’t really art. Second, it often
seems unnecessary: you’ve spent hours — days, weeks, months, years —
thinking about your story. It seems obvious to you what it means. Maybe
you can add a sentence spelling it out for the slow ones, but isn’t that
enough?

It’s not, of course. Your head is full of evidence, examples, models,
implications — all of which your readers aren’t just going to magically
intuit. You need to tell them.

Again, I think I was betrayed by bad writing in my youth. I read a bunch
of “popular” books that were just dreadful. I didn’t know that these
books weren’t actually meant for reading. Turns out, you get paid about
the same amount for writing a truly great magazine article as you do for
a mediocre one and only get a little more attention for the former. So
if you write a really good magazine article, the only way to get
rewarded is to turn it into a book.

The problem is that even the longest magazine articles don’t make for
more 30 pages and you can’t really publish a book that short. So you
write a couple hundred pages of filler. And, in most cases, that only
detracts from your great article by watering it down. You basically just
end up repeating yourself a lot in different words. As a child, I
couldn’t stand books like that and vowed never to write one.

But again I went too far. It’s true, you don’t need to give three
examples of everything you say, but you can’t simply give no examples
either. I’m still trying to figure out where the right balance is.


Reading Samuel Bowles
=====================

August 11, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bowles)

* * * * *

How do you expect an advanced textbook on Microeconomics to begin?
Probably not like this:

> Like the overnight train that left me in an empty field some distance
> from the settlement, the process of economic development has for the
> most part bypassed the two hundred or so families that make up the
> village of Palanpur. They have remained poor, even by Indian
> standards: less than a third of the adults are literate, and most have
> endured the loss of a child to malnutrition or to illnesses that are
> long forgotten in other parts of the world. But for the occasional
> wristwatch, bicycle, or irrigation pump, Palanpur appears to be a
> timeless backwater, untouched by India’s cutting edge software
> industry and booming agricultural regions. Seeking to understand why,
> I approached a sharecropper and his three daughters weeding a small
> plot. The conversation eventually turned to the fact that Palanpur
> farmers sow their winter crops several weeks after the date at which
> yields would be maximized. The farmers do not doubt that earlier
> planting would give them larger harvests, but no one the farmer
> explained, is willing to be the first to plant, as the seeds on any
> lone plot would be quickly eaten by birds. I asked if a large group of
> farmers, perhaps relatives, had ever agreed to sow earlier, all
> planting on the same day to minimize losses. “If we knew how to do
> that,” he said, looking up from his hoe at me, “we would not be poor.”

That’s from Samuel Bowles’ unorthodox economics textbook,
*Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, and Evolution*. We were talking
about it over in the comments on [Crooked
Timber](http://crookedtimber.org/) and one thing led to another and
we’ve decided to start a reading group to go through it.

[You can sign up here.](http://groups.google.com/group/bowles-l)

If you’re still not convinced, check out [this
review](http://www.amazon.com/review/R1SC7AO6623A1Y/ref=cm_cr_rdp_perm):

> …all the relevant issues are presented in their complexity, nothing is
> swept under the carpet, and what makes this book in particular
> commendable is the way in which information from anthropology,
> psychology and the social sciences is weaven into the ‘story’. The
> contrast with the ridiculous assumptions and the unrealistic or simply
> false simplistic models of standard neoclassical textbooks (like for
> example that of Mankiw) is striking. [The difficulty] is mitigated
> somewhat by Bowles’ clear writing, and sometimes he also takes the
> trouble (which unfortunately few economists do) of specifically
> explaining what the mathematical formulas mean, for people who have
> difficulty with somewhat advanced equations and the like. In any case,
> he relies quite correctly more on empirical arguments regarding
> problems of the common, of evolution of institutions, the workings of
> altruism, prisoner’s dilemmas, and so on than on any kind of math
> (although these things can be expressed in math, often).

[You can still sign up here.](http://groups.google.com/group/bowles-l)


Poverty Kills
=============

August 12, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/povertykills)

* * * * *

Bangladesh, 1974. Food per person was at an all-time high — it was a
peak year in rice output and availability. It was also a peak year for
starvation. 100,000 people starved to death, their skin cracking and
their tissues breaking down. They were unable even to focus their eyes
as the world watched on TV. Another million and a half died from
starvation’s secondary effects. Another half-a-million died after the
famine was over because their bodies had been made so weak. There was
plenty of food to feed them. They starved because they were too poor to
afford it.

Poor people die because they can’t get food, because they can’t get
shelter, because they can’t get health care, because they can’t get
homes in places that aren’t polluted, because they can’t get food
without toxins, because they can’t get time off to supervise their kids,
because they can’t spend money on safety, because they can’t spend money
on education, because they can’t get a vacation from the stress that’s
literally eating away at their brain. We don’t even know all the reasons
poor people die. But we do know that they do.

It’s not polite to talk about that. We talk about the poverty rate or
the poverty level or the poverty gap, not kids catching on fire and
adults wasting away. We talk about economic development and markets and
education, not the millions who die each year coughing blood as
tuberculosis takes over their body. (They don’t die from tuberculosis.
They die because they can’t afford the vaccine.)

Eben Kenah wants to change that. His thesis, “[Poverty and the English
Language](http://www.cid.harvard.edu/cidstudents/thesis_prize/thesis_2001/kenah_thesis.pdf)”
[PDF], is the best thing I’ve read in a very long while. Quite
literally, it’s changed the way I look at what’s important in the world.
He argues that the right way to think about poverty isn’t in terms of
GDP or income or education or literacy, but in terms of death. That we
should measure poverty by measuring who it kills. “It is easier to
believe that poverty causes people to wear old clothes, live in small
houses, or forego owning a television than it is to admit that people on
the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder often die early as a result,” he
writes.

A black man in Harlem is 4.11 times as likely to die in a given year as
the average American male. A poor white in Detroit is twice as likely.
Poor people are more likely to die than rich people, lower-class people
than upper-class people, unemployed than employed, blacks than whites.

Mortality resolves a number of long-standing technical debates about the
right way to measure poverty. In the US we calculate poverty by having
experts at the Department of Agriculture figure out the cheapest
products on sale in America that could meet minimal nutritional
requirements. They add up how much they cost and multiply by three.
People with less than that are defined as poor. Can the poor really
follow that minimal diet in practice? How do you even decide what
minimal nutritional requirements are? Why three? The answer is simple:
just count deaths instead.

But thinking about things this way provokes broader, more fundamental
questions, even broader than the issue of global poverty. It makes us
ask: Why do people die? And how can we stop it?

The rich worry about this all the time. Vast sums are spent on their
health care. There’s a whole industry in improving traffic safety.
Billions of dollars are spent to remove minute amounts of chemicals from
water.

But asking that broader question — why do people die? — provides a
framework for all these other issues: health care, education, poverty,
disease, crime, public services, stress, shelter, climate, mobility,
famine, pesticides, fatty foods, toxins, pollution, daycare, quality of
life. It all comes in corpses: clear, countable, comparable facts. We’re
all dead bodies in the end.

A ticker at the bottom of the TV news screen gives people
up-to-the-minute information about how well the stock market is doing.
Nobody tells us how many people are dying right now (107 people every
minute, 5 of them in the US). When a major stock drops, we hear which
and how much and why and how it fits into the bigger market picture.
Nobody does the same for deaths, either individual or in outbreaks.
Nobody’s provided an overall look at why people are dying and how all
our attempts to make the world a better place — from economic growth to
clean water — are helping. Somebody should start.


Scenes 2
========

August 17, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scenes2)

* * * * *

After a long delay, we’re finally allowed to board the plane. As we wait
in line, the businessman in front of me takes out his phone and makes a
call. “Hi, honey,” he says, apparently leaving a message. “We’re only
boarding the plane just now, so I’ll probably be about an hour late. See
you then.” He hangs up the phone and then dials again. “Hi, honey,” he
says, in a similar voice. “We’re only boarding the plane just now, so
I’ll probably be an hour and forty minutes late. See you then.”

* * * * *

A man paces his apartment in a robe. He lives on the penthouse suite of
a modern residential building in an industrial section of Manhattan. He
has the whole top floor; the elevator opens right into his apartment. I
don’t think he’s left the place in days; for food, he orders delivery
and pays at the elevator door. “Can you get me some pot?” he asks. He’s
desperate for it. I give him a piece of paper with the number for a coke
delivery service — “anytime, anywhere”. “Do you think they do weed too?”
he asks. A copy of *Infinite Jest* lies unopened by his bed.

* * * * *

There’s a cafe across the street that has the world’s most perfect corn
muffins. But they only seem to stock just one each day. Every day, I
carefully watch the clock: if I go there too early, I’m not particularly
hungry; if I go there too late, I find them out of corn muffins and
leave empty-handed. Finding the right minute is a constant struggle.

Today I show up and, as usual, there’s just one left. One clerk is
getting it for me (I don’t even have to ask anymore; the clerks all know
I always get just the corn muffin) while another is taking the order of
the woman next to me. “I’ll have the—oh, he got the last one,” she says.
She turns to me. “You got the best muffin!” She walks away empty-handed.


How to Save A Life
==================

August 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/savealife)

* * * * *

In 1972, the philosopher Peter Singer
[proposed](http://www.utilitarian.net/singer/by/1972----.htm) a simple
thought experiment: Imagine you’re on your way to work and you come
across a child drowning in a shallow pond. You’re tall enough that you
can run in and rescue him, but if you do so you’ll ruin your new suit.
Should you save the child?

Almost everyone says yes: the value of saving a child’s life far
outweighs the cost of losing your new suit. Indeed, someone who would
let a child die to save their clothes seems like a monster.

But aha, Singer says. You — yes, *you*, the reader — probably spent
several hundred dollars on new clothes recently, clothes you didn’t
really need. (Or if not clothes, perhaps a dinner out, or music, or
books you could’ve gotten from the library.) And instead of spending
that money on luxuries, you could have [sent it to Partners in
Health](https://donate.pih.org/page/contribute/donate), and they could
have used it to save a child’s life in the developing world.
([GiveWell](http://www.givewell.net/recommended-charities) estimates
that you can save a life for between \$150-\$750.) How are you not a
monster?

Calling your audience monsters is a dangerous move — it’s apt to make
them very upset. (I know I got very upset the first time I read this
argument!) Nobody wants to be thought of as a murderer, so people come
up with all sorts of rationalizations for why they don’t give (it’s not
my responsibility, I do my fair share, foreign aid doesn’t really do any
good, etc.). In his recent book, [*The Life You Can
Save*](http://www.thelifeyoucansave.com/), Singer sets about
systematically debunking these arguments.

In the process, he complicates his original thought experiment. Imagine
now that instead of just you walking by the pond, five people are. And
imagine that five children are also drowning. Still, he argues, most
people would say you should rush in to save a child — even if the other
people passing by don’t.

But there’s one detail Singer leaves out — one that I think dramatically
affects his conclusions: the children didn’t just wander into this pond
on their own; they were pushed.

Imagine an evil man stands above the pond, grabbing children and
throwing them in. People passing by see the children and rush in to try
to save them, but as soon as one is saved or drowns, in goes another,
and another, and another. You can rush in to try to save another child —
or you can try to stop the man.

This doesn’t absolve you of moral duty. Most people do neither — they
just walk on by the pond. But it does complicate the question. I think
most people would say you should try to stop the man, if you can. Even a
utilitarian analysis would suggest this: diving in the pond saves one
life, stopping the man saves thousands.

The man, of course, is economics. People in the developing world are
poor because they live in poor countries — countries without schools or
good jobs or welfare programs or even running water. And their countries
are poor in large part because of us.

It’s often said that visiting a developing country is like traveling
back in time — the conditions seem little changed from those of medieval
Europe. But how did medieval Europe stop being medieval Europe? The
answer is through protectionism: Britain became the reigning world power
by being one of the most protectionist countries on earth, expending
enormous amounts of government money to promote local industries.
Eventually these industries grew strong enough to compete on the world
stage and it withdrew the barriers. The United States eventually
surpassed it with more of the same — many long years of tariffs and
industrial intervention (to this day the US government spends an
enormous amount of money on R&D). Western Europe, the so-called “Asian
tigers” — all the major developed countries of our era got there by
following these principles.

But they don’t want others to follow in their footsteps. Instead of
letting developing countries grow and compete in their own right, they’d
prefer to use them as a source of cheap labor and raw materials. So
enormous effort has been expended on building international institutions
to prevent their economic growth. The World Bank and the IMF issue loans
to countries, but only on the condition they dismantle all forms of
protectionism. The WTO requires countries to agree to principles of
“free trade”. Academic “experts” come up with reasons why protectionism
really hurts everyone and rewrite the history of economic growth.

As a result, poor countries are forced to stay poor and children keep
dying in shallow ponds.

Stopping this is hard. I can give you a phone number to call to donate
to Oxfam and buy a child life-saving treatment. There’s no
comparably-effective way to help reform the WTO. Nobody knows how to
stop the evil man. But it seems weird to pretend that he doesn’t exist.

Singer considers this a purely practical question. As a utilitarian, he
doesn’t support the notion that we have any special responsibility for
the actions of our government. Instead, he says, people should donate to
help the poor in the most effective way they can see — whether that’s
saving lives or structural reform is up to them. But Singer pretty
clearly doesn’t think structural reform is very effective; all of his
examples are about people directly saving lives.

Would the passers-by really just keep jumping in the pond after the
children he kept throwing? Or would they take a moment to stop and
strategize and think of how to stop the evil man. I think most would do
the latter. This isn’t an abstract question. Children are dying right
now. What are you going to do?

*You can donate to the Student Trade Justice Campaign
[here](http://www.tradejusticecampaign.org/donate/). Please post your
suggestions on worthy groups in the comments.*


What Kind of a Thing is Twitter?
================================

August 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/twitter)

* * * * *

Do you ever eavesdrop on random people? At the office, on the subway, in
a park — if you’re quiet, you can listen to people chat. If you do, you
quickly find that, for the most part, they have conversations that seem
perfectly boring. This is most obvious on IRC (Internet text chat)
where, since the conversations are entirely textual, they can be
perfectly transcribed. If you look at the transcripts later, you find
they’re often almost unreadable — even in channels dedicated to very
technical topics, you’ll find hours of conversation about someone’s dog.

Such conversation clearly does not perform an objective
information-sharing function — the relevant facts about the dog can be
laid out in a paragraph (if that). It serves a social function — a
function with a deep evolutionary history. Primates get to know each
other through grooming each other’s fur. But that’s time-consuming; as a
result, primates rarely form groups larger than 25. One of the big
breakthroughs for humans was moving from grooming to gossip. Instead of
25 people, the average human knows 150. And so we talk, and as we talk
we reveal our personalities to each other: the things we care about, the
way we think, the subjects we understand. We make friends through this
process of conversation and personality reveal, even though objectively
the conversation is about matters that seem trivial. When it comes to
our friends, we know a lot of trivia.

What Twitter^[1](#fn:1)^ does is automate this process. Instead of
telling your bit of gossip or joke or humdrum story or minor complaint
to each of your friends as you see them, you tell it once to Twitter,
and then all your friends can see it. And just like the transition from
grooming to gossip, Twitter allows for an explosion in the number of
people we know. Where, in the past, it was only practical to have these
kinds of close, chatty friendships with a handful of people (even using
a technology like IM), now — using the power of the Web to bridge time
and space — you can have them with hundreds.

But the relationships need not be symmetrical. One of the things that’s
clear about celebrities in the age of television is that they take
advantage of this innate social sense. (*Fahrenheit 451* is caustic on
this subject.) We see these people all the time, we listen to them, we
watch them — and we come to feel as if we *know* them. And so,
naturally, our innate social sense kicks in and we want to hear their
gossip — a need tabloids try their best to fill.

Twitter provides a more raw, unmediated access to celebrity gossip.
Instead of hearing about it second-hand from TV news, we hear about it
straight from them. Oprah, of course, has been a pioneer of this: with a
daily long-form television show, she’s been able to cultivate (and
monetize) a friendship with millions. But most celebrities don’t have
that kind of access to their “followers.” They do on Twitter.

The catch, of course, is that it’s all somewhat fake. What you see on
Oprah’s show isn’t the real Oprah; it’s a hyperreal Oprah, a
carefully-crafted simulation of a gregarious friend chatting with you in
your living room — makeup, lighting, sets, and script are all carefully
planned to seem “natural.” And most Twitter feeds are the same —
humorists spend days polishing the one-liner they seem to carelessly
toss off, politicians have speechwriters thinking up soundbites that
they can tweet.

But it’s not just fake, it’s empty. The reason such apparently boring
conversation is interesting is because the act of conversation itself
reveals your personality. We assume we know the people whose petty
complaints and daily routines we’ve heard so much about because,
traditionally, the only way to hear such things was to get to know them
well. But it’s impossible to really know someone through sanitized
soundbites. In 140 characters, there’s little room for the nuances of
personality such conversation typically reveals. So, like Oprah’s
audience, we all see the carefully-prepared facade people *want* to
present, and come away thinking that we know them better than we really
do.

With people we know in “real life,” this isn’t such a big deal. We
already know their personality; Twitter simply helps maintain our
relationship by keeping us up-to-date. And while, in doing so, it lets
us maintain vastly more relationships, I’m not sure this is a bad thing.
Many people are starved for human relationship — we spend most of our
lives at the office, or at home watching TV and playing video games.
Most Americans live in suburbs with no street life and even in cities
everyone’s wearing iPods and thus unable to stop and chat. If Twitter
can help bring us together in an increasingly isolated world, then all
the better (and, it seems, with some positive political consequences as
well).

But, for the people we don’t know, it has the effect of making them all
Oprah. In the same way her millions of fans trust her book ([and movie
and health and plastic surgery…](http://www.newsweek.com/id/200025))
recommendations unquestioningly, because they feel that they know her,
Twitter can make us trust other celebrities. If you feel like your
Senator is a personal friend (and how can you not, after hearing them
tell you about their struggle to lose weight and the guy they met at the
gym?), then how could you possibly vote against them?

This isn’t new, of course. It goes back as far as radio (possibly
further). Pappy O’Daniel did it in Texas in the 1940s. He got on the
radio every day at noon and just chatted, like an old friend — sang a
few songs, read a little of his poetry, but mostly he just talked with
quiet cheer. And people treated him like a friend: he asked them to buy
his flour (simply other companies’ flour repackaged with his picture on
it and resold at a higher price) and they bought it. He asked them to
vote for him and they elected him Governor of Texas in a landslide —
whereupon, not knowing anything about politics, he plunged the state
government into turmoil and disaster. But he kept up those daily
broadcasts — now conducted from the Governor’s mansion — and they kept
on reelecting him. He was their friend, after all.

Twitter probably isn’t going to make THE\_REAL\_SHAQ governor, but I
don’t think it’s crazy to worry about it having similar effects.
Luckily, it also provides the tools for undoing these relationships. For
the housewives stuck at home with the TV, Oprah is the only option. But
on Twitter, at the same time you sign up to hear from Oprah, you can
also follow — and cement your relationship with — more real friends. And
it’s a good thing too, because with all these fake friends running
around, we’re going to need all the real ones we can get.

* * * * *

1.  I’ll say Twitter because it’s become the accepted term, but
    obviously this applies to similar services like
    identi.ca. [↩](#fnref:1)




The Newswipe Manifesto
======================

August 24, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newswipe)

* * * * *

*Charlie Brooker begins his recent BBC4 show*
[Newswipe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newswipe_with_Charlie_Brooker)
*with this speech. Unfortunately, the show doesn’t quite live up to
these ambitions, being basically a version of* [Charlie Brooker’s
Screenwipe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlie_Brooker%27s_Screenwipe)
*focused on the news, but they seem like the right ambitions to me.*

> Back in 1919, when I was a kid and my throat was less sore, I always
> assumed adults knew what was what. So imagine my horror, on growing
> up, to discover that actually we’re all just winging it. As adults,
> there’s a whole range of things you’re supposed to ‘know about’ and
> ‘have opinions on’: everything from what wine to serve at your twatty
> dinner party through to what’s going on in the world of ‘current
> affairs’.
>
> Yes, it turns out you were supposed to be paying attention to the news
> all this time. Although the chances are you haven’t, at least not
> really. I mean, when were you meant to start? When you’re a kid, the
> news is effectively out of bounds. It’s a program aimed at adults
> that’s either impenetrably boring (‘the economy minister for the
> economy today said interest rates were discombobulating the trade
> union a—’) or downright terrifying (‘murdered horses and terrorists
> today said that you and your mummy and daddy are certain to die in a
> global ap—’).
>
> Anyway, the end result is that you ignore the news for years and then
> suddenly, somewhere down the line when you’re a bit older, there’s
> comes a point when you realize you’re completely bloody ignorant.
> Maybe you find yourself sitting next to some erudite f—ker at a dinner
> party who’s banging on about the Israel-Palestine situation or maybe
> you start going out with an opinionated news junkie who wants to
> discuss politics for 60,000 hours. Either way, your comparative
> ignorance leaves you ashamed. So you do something about it: you pick
> up a paper or you switch on the news. But because you’ve fallen behind
> it’s like tuning into episode 803 of the world’s most complex soap
> opera.
>
> And at the same time the news itself is becoming less of an easily
> digestible summary of events and more of a grotesque entertainment
> reality show with heavy emphasis on emotion and sensation and a
> swaggering comically theatrical sense of its own importance.
>
> In the end you just give up and, yes, you wing it: you form knee-jerk
> opinions about the sort of thing that’s in the news. Politicians and
> newsmakers notice, which is why everything’s geared more and more to
> sound bites and razzle-dazzle. The soap opera analogy is a sound one
> because that’s what the news has become.
>
> It’s showbiz, basically, and as a consequence the news has become just
> another rolling TV show who’s meaning is lost somewhere amongst all
> the babble. Sometimes it’s happy and sometimes it’s sad, but somehow,
> it isn’t real.


Google Voice Security Flaw
==========================

August 25, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gvoiceflaw)

* * * * *

Google Voice allows you to get a new telephone number (a “Google Voice
number”) and when people dial that number, Google will patch the call
through to your various other phones. That way you can give people one
phone number and it will ring your home phone, your cell phone, your
work phone. (Apparently this is a service for people who still have home
and work phones.)

It now requires new phones to go through a verification process to be
added to that list, but I believe that phones that were added back when
Google Voice was GrandCentral (Google bought it) are carried over and
never required verification.

You can also create rules for which phones ring. I set mine up so that
if the callbox at our apartment calls the Google Voice number (i.e.
someone is trying to get into the apartment), it rings both me and my
roommate. Otherwise it just rings me.

Now here’s the odd thing: when my roommate texts someone with a Google
Voice number (or vice versa), their SMS chats show up in *my* Google
Voice account. It took me a long time to figure out what was going on —
at first it just looked like other people’s SMS chats were just
appearing in my inbox. But it now seems clear that Google Voice looks at
the phone number of incoming SMSes and, if it’s attached to an account,
stores the SMSes in that account.

I suppose one should trust their roommate, but I think people should be
aware of this issue nonetheless.


Why I Won’t Use Rimuhosting
===========================

August 27, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rimuhosting)

* * * * *

I originally got a VPS at Rimuhosting because their website lauded their
“fanatical service” and a friend had concurred. In September 2006, I
ordered my first server.

In December, a friend asked if I knew any good VPS hosts. I said I used
Rimuhosting and hadn’t had any problems. “That’s funny,” he replied.
“rimuhosting is the company that’s just given me horrible support over
the last 2 weeks. No answers to email for 2+ days, then a claim that
they didn’t receive it, then I send them the mail server log that says
they should have received it, then they say ‘oh, that’s interesting. oh
well.’”

I guess that should have been a sign for me. But instead, he changed his
tune: “Well, if everyone thinks they’re so great, maybe I’ll give them
another chance.”

The server went down for maintenance three times and was moved to a new
IP once. In April 2008, the real trouble started. I was dinged for
bandwidth overruns, apparently because Yahoo! was crawling the same
files on my server hundreds of times a day. In June, they complained I
was monopolizing the CPU, even though when I logged in the machine was
100% idle. They complained again in October and November and December
and offered to take a look at the problem if I gave them root on the
box. “Over my dead body,” I thought.

In December they set a CPU cap on my VPS. Then came the amazing bit.
Despite already having sold me a VPS and put a CPU cap on my usage of
it, they manually edited my partition to add their SSH key to my
`authorized_keys`, used that to **gain root on my box**, noticed that a
CGI script was using up CPU, and responded by **turning off Apache**.
They didn’t even try to call me to talk about it in advance. They didn’t
even call me at all. They just sent a little email. After the fact. The
subject? “index.cgi is causing high CPU usage”

I asked them what was going on. Here was their reply:

> In our welcome email we do mention that we have installed our key on
> your server.
>
> We use that to help our customers. You are able to remove that if you
> are not comfortable with that.

Of course, I did remove it. They used their control of the hardware to
add it back in.

> We work to ensure that customer’s get a fair share of the CPU, and
> that their servers perform well.
>
> If everyone is trying to max out the CPU then everyone’s performance
> will be poor. We can set it so that you get a fixed amount of CPU (and
> then we don’t mind how much CPU want to use). Or we can let your CPU
> burst up to 100% of a host server CPU core, in which case your server
> will run fast, but in which case we’d need to make sure you do not
> monopolize the CPU.

Or, they can break into my box and turn off my webserver. Oddly they
don’t mention that last option.

> If you think we can help in any other way, e.g. investigating that
> script or anything, just let us know.

I suppose this is the service Rimuhosting is known for. I won’t be
taking advantage of it again.


The Trouble with Nonprofits
===========================

September 7, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/measurenonprofit)

* * * * *

In the 1990s, a group of psychologists began studying what made experts
expert. Their first task was to see whether experts really were expert —
whether they were particularly good at their jobs.

What they found was that some were and some weren’t. Champion chess
players, obviously, are much better at playing chess than you and I. But
political pundits, it turns out, aren’t that much better at making
predictions than a random guy off the street.

What distinguishes people who are great at what they do from those who
are just mediocre? The answer, it seems, is feedback. If you lose a
chess game, it’s pretty obvious you lost. You know right away, you feel
bad, and you start thinking about what you did wrong and how you can
improve.

Making a bad prediction isn’t like that. First, it’s months or years
before your prediction is [proven wrong](http://wrongtomorrow.com/). And
then, you make yourself feel better by coming up with some explanation
for why you were wrong: *well, nobody expected that to happen; it threw
everything else off!* And so you keep on making predictions in the same
way — which means you never get good at it.

The difference between chess and predictions is a lot like the
difference between companies and nonprofits. If your company is losing
money, it’s pretty obvious. You know right away, you feel bad, and you
start thinking about how to fix it. (And if you don’t fix it, you go
bankrupt.) But if your nonprofit isn’t accomplishing its goals, it’s
much less obvious. You can point to various measurable signs of success
(look at all the members we have, look at all the articles we’ve been
quoted in) and come up with all sorts of explanations for why it’s not
your fault.

This isn’t to say that we should have companies replace nonprofits, any
more than we should have chess games replace predictions. The two serve
completely different goals — nonprofits aim at improving the world, not
making money. But it does mean that if you’re involved in nonprofits (or
predictions), you need to be much more careful about making sure you’re
doing a good job.

Unfortunately, few nonprofits do that. Take, for example, the Center for
American Progress, widely believed to be one of the most effective
political nonprofits. They say their goal is “improving the lives of
Americans through ideas and action.” But their “marketing brochure,”
while filled with glossy photos, doesn’t even attempt to see whether
they’re accomplishing this goal. It touts that they’ve released “an
economic strategy for the next administration,” “convened a task force …
to develop policy,” and “developed a plan for the bulk transfer auction
of at-risk mortgages.” There’s not a single attempt to demonstrate that
any of these things has approved the lives of Americans, let alone
estimate how much.

Measuring things is hard and expensive, even in the simplest cases.
Measuring the effect of loaning money to Africans seems a lot easier
than measuring the impact of of a think tank report. But when Peter
Singer asked Oxfam to measure the effectiveness of giving microcredit to
villages in West Africa, they declined, on the grounds that it would
have taken up half the budget.

But not measuring is even more expensive. Imagine that Oxfam
experimented with two microcredit programs and found that one did 10%
better than the other. Even with this very modest improvement, it would
only take helping five villages before the experiment paid for itself.

And, as anyone who’s done these sorts of experiments knows, you often
see improvements well in excess of 10%. To take a silly example, [Dustin
Curtis
experimented](http://dustincurtis.com/you_should_follow_me_on_twitter.html)
with getting more readers of his weblog to follow him on Twitter. After
four experiments, he’d achieved a 173% improvement. And even this is
probably underestimating things. I expect many nonprofits are not
accomplishing their goals *at all*. Even if they made a little bit of
progress, their improvement would be mathematically infinite. (It’s also
quite possible that many nonprofits are actually being
*counter*-productive. After all, before we started measuring the effects
of medical treatment, we were bleeding people with leeches.)

What can be done about this? I think that everyone who donates to a
nonprofit should demand an accounting of results — not just the number
of times they’ve been cited in the media or the number of policy
discussions they’ve held, but an actual attempt to measure how much
they’re improving people’s lives. For most nonprofits, I expect these
numbers will be depressingly small. But that’s much better than having
no numbers at all. For feeling bad about failing is the first step to
doing better next time.


Why I Am Not Gay
================

September 8, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/notgay)

* * * * *

Until recently, men having sex with men was disapproved of in American
culture. Actually, “disapproved of” isn’t really the right word — it was
immoral, illegal, disgusting. People who did it lived in secrecy, under
the constant threat of blackmail for their actions.

In the tumult of the 1960s, various out-groups — blacks, Chicanos,
Native Americans — begun organizing themselves and demanding to be
respected and given their due. And men-who-had-sex-with-men decided that
they were an out-group — they were gay — and they deserved rights too.

In doing so, they transformed an action (having relationships with
someone of the same gender) into an identity (“being gay”). And, using
the normal human mechanisms for distinguishing between people in your
club and those not in it, they closed ranks. Gay men didn’t have sex
with women. Those who did weren’t gay, they were “bi” (which became a
whole new identity in itself) — or probably just lying to themselves.
And straight men had to be on constant guard against being attracted to
other men — if they were, it meant that deep down, they were actually
gay.

This new gay identity was projected back through history — famous
historical figures were “outed” as gay, because they’d once taken lovers
of their own gender. They truly were gay underneath, it was said — it
was just a homophobic society that forced them to appear to like the
opposite sex.

Along with the identity went an attempt at justification. Being gay
wasn’t “a choice,” they argued — it was innate. Some people were just
born gay and others weren’t. To a culture that tried to “correct” gay
people into being straight, they insisted that correction was impossible
— they just weren’t wired this way. (They even provided a ridiculous
genetic explanation for how a species with a small percentage gay people
might evolve.)

This might have been a good thing to say — maybe even necessary in such
a homophobic culture — but in the end it has to be seen as simply wrong.
Having sex with other people of your gender isn’t an identity, it’s an
act. And, like sex in general among consenting adults, people should be
able to do it if they want to. Having sex with someone shouldn’t require
an identity crisis. (Nobody sees having-sex-with-white-people as part of
their identity, even if that’s primarily who they’re attracted to.)

People shouldn’t be forced to categorize themselves as “gay,”
“straight,” or “bi.” People are just people. Maybe you’re mostly
attracted to men. Maybe you’re mostly attracted to women. Maybe you’re
attracted to everyone. These are historical claims — not future
predictions. If we truly want to expand the scope of human freedom, we
should encourage people to date who they want; not just provide more
categorical boxes for them to slot themselves into. A man who has mostly
dated men should be just as welcome to date women as a woman who’s
mostly dated men.

So that’s why I’m not gay. I hook up with people. I enjoy it. Sometimes
they’re men, sometimes they’re women. I don’t see why it needs to be any
more complicated than that.


A Political Startup
===================

September 8, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pcccstory)

* * * * *

*“Politics is like the weather: everybody discusses it but nobody
actually does anything about it.”*

The golden dome of the Massachusetts State House rises majestically over
the grass of Boston Common. The sun glints off the dome while kids play
on the grass, but on the State House steps there is nobody except for a
couple of my friends — and me, holding a ridiculously-large stack of
paper that threatened to blow away in the breeze. “This is what failure
looks like,” I thought.

Within half an hour, I found myself standing in the same place,
surrounded by TV cameras and microphones on all sides, reporters
throwing questions as fast as I could answer them. And the papers hadn’t
blown away. How did I get here?

* * * * *

At the beginning of the year, I cofounded a political action committee,
[the Progressive Change Campaign
Committee](http://boldprogressives.org/). We had no money and no members
and not much of a plan for how to get them. We wrote up long proposals
for big donors on why they should write us checks, and tried negotiating
with electoral candidates on why they should send us members, but
neither of these were particularly successful. Then Jon Stewart attacked
Jim Cramer.

Cramer came to symbolize the foolishness and vapidity of the media in
the face of the financial crisis. His blatantly buffoonish cluelessness
(“*Don’t move your money from Bear! That’s just being silly! Don’t be
silly!*”) were the epitome of a press that championed the housing bubble
and fumbled the crash. We were giddy about the press getting their day
in scorn, but we wanted to accomplish positive change as well. So we hit
upon the idea of starting a petition to demand CNBC hire someone who was
*right* about the housing crisis.

We spread the word to friends and bloggers and before we knew it we had
nearly 20,000 signatures — 20,000 new members. It was quite the start.

A couple months later, frustrated that Norm Coleman wouldn’t drop his
spurious legal challenges against Al Franken being named a Senator, we
started NormDollar.com. We asked people to donate a dollar each day Norm
Coleman didn’t drop out of the race, money we’d spend electing
progressive candidates. It was featured on *Hardball* and throughout the
political press. We also videotaped Norm’s donors’ reactions when we
told them about the program. But my favorite was when we presented Norm
with a big novelty check for him to sign, representing all the money
he’d raised for progressives.

Now we had money too.

I came back from my month offline to find we were raising money for TV
ads — running ads in DC pressuring representatives to support the public
health care option, asking whether they’d sold out to their insurance
industry campaign contributors. And when Sen. Ben Nelson started a
campaign to stall the health care bill, we filmed an ad with Mike
Snider. Mike talked plainly to the camera about how, as owner of the
local Syzzlyn Skillet, he received a call from his insurers saying they
were raising his rates by 42%. “I can’t afford that!” he exclaimed. And
then to hear his own Senator was trying to prevent health care reform?

Mike was just an average guy who made a real political difference. After
we started airing our ad, Ben Nelson’s spokesperson tried to denounce
him and the Senator himself called Mike and asked to see his health care
bills. Mike was a guest on *The Rachel Maddow Show* and his restaurant
has become a base of operations for the local political community.
Mike’s story was so powerful that Ben Nelson was forced to put up his
own ads directly responding to it — even though Nelson isn’t up for
reelection in years — in which he (ridiculously) calls Mike a lying DC
politician.

Mike’s story really inspired me as to the difference just one person
could make, but I never thought that person would be me. When my
Senator, Ted Kennedy, passed away, I wanted to honor his memory by
fighting for the causes he fought for. His last request had been a
letter to the Massachusetts legislature asking them to change the law
and let a replacement be appointed to his seat to continue his fight for
universal health care. Without the change, the seat would stay vacant
for five months while an election could be scheduled — and the next five
months will be crucial.

With the rest of the (growing) PCCC team, we came up with a plan to
launch a petition asking the legislature to honor that request. We sent
out an email asking people to sign and tell their friends. Within a few
days, we had 20,000 signatures. I was blown away — clearly people cared.

I’d promised to deliver the signatures on Monday, without really
thinking about what that entailed. I called the office of the Senate
President and Speaker of the House to ask when I could come by and film
a short video of the petitions being dropped off. The President of the
Senate’s office blew me off, insisting that under no circumstances were
cameras allowed in their office and saying that the President simply
couldn’t meet with me. So we decided to make the delivery something they
couldn’t ignore.

We emailed our list to ask people in the area to show up on the State
House steps at 11am Monday. Then we emailed the press and asked them to
get there at 11:15. I stayed up all night the night before, feeding
paper into the printer trying to print out 20,000 names. Then I grabbed
a stack and headed to the State House.

The stack — 600 sheets or so — kept trying to fall over and blow away
and at the State House there were only a couple friends who were loaning
me their camera. We decided to go in and scope out President Murray’s
office. When we came back, our members started arriving: old ladies with
their grandchildren, college students, and everyone in between. The
media started pressing closer: a photographer for the *Herald*, a
cameraman for Fox. Microphones kept being shoved in my face and people
kept asking me to spell my name. I hefted the stack of petitions and
kept repeating why I was here.

Local TV news isn’t exactly known for its crack reporters, but I have to
say I was impressed by Janet Wu. She didn’t just ask me the standard
questions, but kept pushing me on the hard stuff, barking responses at
me, not letting me off the hook. The other reporters smelled blood and
joined in. Soon I was at the center of a full scrum of cameras and
microphones — surrounded on all sides, every local TV station there. I
like to think I comported myself well: I didn’t get angry or flustered,
I refused to me taken off-message, I kept stressing that this was about
doing what the people wanted.

(Later, away from the cameras, Wu was a completely different person.
“Hey there, little guy,” she cooed at a grandchild. “Hey, it’s OK, you
can talk to me.” Actually, I thought the kid might have the right idea
by staying quiet.)

At some point all the cameras dematerialized. “OK, go in,” someone said.
“Just pretend we’re not here.” They’d all rematerialized down the
street, to film us marching into the capitol, stack of signatures in
hand.

Believe it or not, it’s not easy to walk into the state capitol holding
600 pieces of paper with TV cameras in front of you and a crowd of
supporters behind. I kept wondering where to look and trying not to lose
the rest of the crowd. Who knows how that footage came out. And when I
got up the steps the reporters dematerialized again and rematerialized
inside at the Senate President’s office, to film us marching down the
hallway. We entered her office and all crowded in — I didn’t think we
were all going to fit, but we just barely did. The receptionist — in the
middle of a phone call — looked a bit flustered. We waited patiently.
Soon a broad-shouldered man in a suit came out. “Thanks so much for the
petitions,” he said, taking them from me. “The proposal will go through
the usual process. He turned to head out. I was dumbstruck.

But, bravely, one of the older women spoke up. “Wait,” she said. “The
normal process? Isn’t this a matter of some urgency?” “All I can say is
it will go through the usual process.” Those women wouldn’t let him go.
But eventually he did, looking the perfect image of the arrogant
unconcerned Boston pol, and Janet Wu stuck a microphone in my face. “Do
you feel satisfied?” she asked. I started to speak but she interrupted.
“Wait. OK, go again: Do you feel satisfied?”

Outside, a cameraman turned the bright lights on one of the older woman.
She was saying, far more clearly and convincingly than me, that no, she
wasn’t satisfied. That this was an important issue and she wanted to be
heard. I was so glad she came.

And then the press and the supporters dematerialized again. I was left,
once again, alone with just my friends. We stood in the hallway trying
to process what just happened. We caught the man who’d taken the
petitions as he was coming out of the office. “So, what is your actual
title?” I asked. “Director of Communications,” he said.

“And where is the Senate President really?” asked a friend. “Oh, she’s
in Russia,” he explained. “Russia?” “Yeah, she’s helping with a
nonprofit to assist orphaned children. Pre-scheduled trip. She does it
every year.” “You’re saying she can’t meet with us because she’s in
Russia saving orphans?” I asked. “That’s a pretty incredible excuse.” We
all laughed. He headed off down the hallway.

“Wait, one more thing,” a friend called after him. “Where’s a good place
around here we can get some lunch?”

* * * * *

Please, [sign our
petition](http://salsa.wiredforchange.com/o/5649/t/4923/content.jsp?content_KEY=2762&tag=hk1_asw).


A Short Course in Ethics
========================

September 14, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ethics)

* * * * *

How are we to live? Most people seem to agree that there are “right”
things and “wrong” things and we should try to do the right ones, but
they’re less clear on how to figure out what the right ones are.

Some say there are certain moral rules (don’t murder, don’t steal) that
we must follow to be right. But how do you decide what those rules are?
Many such rules have been proposed; how do we pick the good ones?

If you ask someone to justify a rule, they usually do it by listing its
*consequences*: if we don’t steal, God will reward us; everyone will be
happier if we stop killing. In the end, it seems like everything boils
down to consequences: good acts are those which accomplish good things.

So how do we decide what good things are? Doesn’t everyone have their
own idea of what’s good? Instead of trying to promote one particular
person’s notion of what’s good, it seems like we should balance
everyone’s good. In most cases, it’s impossible for us to know what’s
actually good for a person, so this usually means taking their word for
it and trying to give them what they *want*.

(Cases where people don’t seem to want what’s good for them are usually
cases where people are confused about what they want. I may think I
really want to eat this whole box of cookies but later I’ll realize I
really wish I hadn’t.)

But everyone wants different things — how do we balance their desires?
It seems like the only fair thing to do is to treat everyone equally. Of
course, this doesn’t mean treating every want equally: if one person
wants a yacht and another person wants a dry place to sleep tonight, the
second want seems much stronger than the first; filling it will
accomplish more overall good.

Here’s another way to look at this. Imagine that before we were born, we
all sat up in the heavens and talked about how to design the world. None
of us yet know which bodies we would be born into or which parents we’d
have, so none of us can possibly be biased. Aren’t we all going to want
to promote the greatest good overall? We’ll make sure the worst-off
aren’t particularly worse-off in case we’re one of them, and we’ll make
sure the rest aren’t especially handicapped in case we’re one of
them.^[1](#fn:p)^ If we have to choose between a world with one more
yacht for Larry Ellison and one with one more dry place to sleep for a
woman in poverty, we’ll probably pick the dry place.

So we have our simple moral principle: when faced with a question, pick
the answer that will accomplish the most overall good. Two friends both
want to borrow my TV tonight, but one already has a TV and just wants it
so he can watch two channels at once, while the other can’t afford even
a single television. Our principle suggests the TV goes to the second.

But our principle doesn’t just apply to the questions we’re obviously
faced with. Surely there are many other people who want a TV and have
even less than my friend. By our logic, they would seem to deserve the
TV even more, even though they didn’t happen to be asking me for it and
thus forcing me to confront the question.

It seems like we need to think more carefully about the implicit
question of each moment: what do I do now — with my time, my money, my
possessions? And it seems like we need to apply the same moral rule.

The conclusion is inescapable: we must live our lives to promote the
most overall good. And that would seem to mean helping those most in
want — the world’s poorest people.

Our rule demands one do everything they can to help the poorest — not
just spending one’s wealth and selling one’s possessions, but breaking
the law if that will help. I have friends who, to save money, break into
buildings on the MIT campus to steal food and drink and naps and
showers. They use the money they save to promote the public good. It
seems like these criminals, not the average workaday law-abiding
citizen, should be our moral exemplars.

Such a thorough-going conception of ethics seems incredibly difficult.
Surely it requires severe changes in our life. The traditional notion of
ethics is much easier — there are some bad things (stealing, lying,
cheating) and we need to try our best not to do them. But, as in any
field, it’s important to separate the truth from what’s convenient.
People are often criticized for not doing what they think is right
(hypocrisy), but not believing in what’s right because it’s hard to do
is far worse!

I am convinced that the account here is largely correct, but I certainly
don’t live up to its demanding standards. And that’s OK. One of the
conclusions of this argument is that it’s impossible to be perfectly
moral. By accepting that, and keeping it in the back of my mind, I do a
little better each day.

For a long time, people told me eating meat was wrong and I refused to
believe them, because I thought it would be impossible for me not to eat
meat. Then one day, I accepted that they were right and I was doing the
wrong thing and I decided I could live with that. I wasn’t perfect. But
shortly after I decided that, meat started seeming less and less
attractive, and I started eating less and less, and now I don’t eat it
at all anymore.

Accepting you’re immoral is the first step to being a more moral person.

* * * * *

1.  This thought experiment comes from philosopher John Rawls, although
    its conclusion has been [modified by Peter
    Singer](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/9252). [↩](#fnref:p)




Honest Theft
============

September 15, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/honesttheft)

* * * * *

[Yesterday](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ethics) I mentioned the case
of my friends who save money by living at MIT. They sleep on couches in
the common rooms, break into the showers in the gym, and steal food and
drink from the cafeterias. They use the money they save on necessities
to promote the public good. I suggested that they’re actually behaving
more morally than the average citizen. This seems shocking, so let’s
look at the objections in depth.

There’s the obvious argument that by taking these things without paying,
they’re actually passing on their costs to the rest of the MIT
community. But for most of these things, there are no costs: no MIT
students use the couches or the showers at night. And while it’s true
that taking MIT food and drink probably does increase the university’s
costs slightly, this concern doesn’t seem too consistently applied. Do
you think it’s wrong to take one of the free refreshments at an MIT
event? The consequences seem about the same.

Even if they were costing MIT money, it seems this could be justified.
MIT receives enormous sums from the wealthy and powerful, more than they
know how to spend. Much of it gets spent on unneeded luxuries for their
already-elite students. Redistributing it to the town’s poorer residents
seems potentially justified.

Others claim that this lifestyle results in increased security costs. I
don’t see how that’s true unless the students get caught. Even if they
did, MIT has a notoriously relaxed security policy, so they likely
wouldn’t get in too much trouble and MIT probably wouldn’t do anything
to up their security.

A more serious complaint is that this “erodes the social contact.” Peter
Singer (no contract theorist he!) puts this more clearly in his book
*Democracy and Disobedience*: In any society people are going to have
disputes. Everyone’s better off if these disputes are resolved without
resorting to force. Thus in most societies there are governments to help
resolve disputes peacefully. Resorting to force when you don’t like
their resolution could tip things back to the bad state of people
resolving things through force in general.

I don’t think this is a particularly plausible concern. My friends
(understandably) keep quiet about their lifestyle. If anyone, *I* am the
one undermining the social contract by publicizing it. But let’s keep me
out of this analysis for a second. It’s hard to see how sleeping on MIT
couches will lead to violent revolution.^[1](#fn:d)^

It’s possible there are other objections to this style of life. Or
perhaps some objectors are right — and not only shouldn’t we steal from
MIT, but we shouldn’t take advantage of their largesse either. But
thinking about these questions — as opposed to blindly following rules —
is what it means to be a moral person and instead of eroding the social
contract it seems much more likely to strengthen our moral sense.

* * * * *

1.  Singer identifies one other concern, particular to democracies. (He
    thinks the previous concern is especially relevant in democracies,
    since there’s not much improvement revolution can lead to, but in
    the end he decides this isn’t too relevant since modern
    “democracies” aren’t actually democratic.) He suggests that it’s
    wrong to participate in politics and vote like everybody else, but
    then refuse to follow the rules when the decision ends up being
    something you don’t like.

    I think this is a fairly silly objection and basically impossible to
    justify on utilitarian grounds. (The book is Singer’s doctoral
    thesis and is weirdly agnostic on utilitarianism. It’s also not
    particularly well-written, so my apologies if I’m missing part of
    Singer’s argument.)

    Imagine it’s a presidential election year and the major issue is
    that candidate A has promised to make kids in public schools wear
    uniforms while candidate B opposes it. (Imagine also that the
    president has the power to accomplish this rule change by simple
    executive order.) Whatever happens, you refuse to send your child to
    school wearing a uniform — you plan to keep dressing them as you do
    now. You have two choices: vote for candidate B or not cast a vote
    for president.

    Singer suggests that if you vote for B and A wins, you ought to make
    your child wear the uniform. It’s hard to see how this helps anyone.
    Nobody knows whether you voted for president or not (it’s a secret
    ballot), no good (as far as I can see) comes from not voting.
    Indeed, if you vote for B, you make it more likely that everyone
    avoids this unjust law *and* you make it more likely you won’t have
    to resort to civil disobedience and erode the social fabric.

    It’s hard to see how any intuitive notion of obligation can trump
    this. [↩](#fnref:d)




On Finishing *Infinite Jest*
============================

September 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/finij)

* * * * *

> **NOTE:** For those who have actually read *Infinite Jest*, you’ll
> probably get more out of my very spoiler-heavy summary of [what
> happens just after the end of the
> book](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ijend).

I don’t remember starting Infinite Jest. I don’t even remember buying
it. I remember seeing its bulk and oddly-entrancing cover in the
basement of the seminary coop. But the price sticker on the back shows I
bought it on sale at a Borders. I don’t think I’d read anything by DFW
when I bought it. I can’t remember why I would have. I very rarely read
novels. Did someone recommend it? I can’t imagine who. Maybe I just
thought, I need something long to take on this trip.

I remember reading chapter 2 (Eredy Waits for Pot) the week I spent in
Boston after I got back from Europe. So I must have taken it to Europe.
So I probably bought it at the San Francisco Westfield Borders; that was
the bookstore I shopped at back then.

Did I start it in Europe? Around page 750, I found a note I couldn’t
read in a hand I didn’t recognize with a symbol I couldn’t understand.
But it was stamped with the address of our German hotel. Although I
don’t remember having a room in the hotel myself; I just remember
sleeping in other people’s rooms. I must have had a room, though, right?

That week in Boston I tried to write a book. Then I got sick. I stopped
leaving the apartment. I stopped eating. I went a bit bats, I suppose.
But it was getting sick that start of it, some kind of bad cold or
something. I remember that. It didn’t leave me with much interest in
swallowing food.

I remember taking the novel to the cafe on the corner. I remember the
cafe being largely empty, huge lakes of golden light streaming in
through the window, making everything glow. Time seemed to be slowed
down, every moment made up of beautiful frames. And I read about Eredy
waiting for pot.

My apartment at the time was a dingy place. My roommates and I had moved
to San Francisco and the place was left empty except for the collecting
dust. It was a big place, held three people before we left, and I had it
to myself, to go mad in.

I next remember reading it in my new place in San Francisco, which I got
later that year. I remember thinking it didn’t make much sense and had
only a handful of good parts. I dusted it off again at my new place in
Boston for Infinite Summer, starting from where I left off. But around
page 500, I realized it wasn’t a bunch of isolated stories like I’d
assumed. As the Aventura kicked shit into the Antitoi’s door I realized
I’d been missing the point. On a trip to DC, I flipped back to check a
detail and was shocked to find whole swathes of things I didn’t even
recognize, whole chapters I’d not only forgotten but showed no signs of
ever having read, rereading them didn’t jog a single memory.

The whole book is laced through with mocking cracks at this disconnected
style, like a preemptive apology. And the ending really doesn’t help
matters. But in the middle it is truly grand, some of the best fiction
ever. I just hope that I’ll remember it.


What Happens at the End of Infinite Jest? (or, the Infinite Jest ending explained)
==================================================================================

September 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ijend)

* * * * *

> Herb: Is there no “ending” to “Infinite Book” because there couldn’t
> be? Or did you just get tired of writing it?
>
> DFW: There is an ending as far as I’m concerned. Certain kind of
> parallel lines are supposed to start converging in such a way that an
> “end” can be projected by the reader somewhere beyond the right frame.
> If no such convergence or projection occurred to you, then the book’s
> failed for you.

([Live Online with David Foster Wallace, May 17,
1996](http://www.badgerinternet.com/~bobkat/jest11a.html))

**WARNING:** This whole thing is one gigantic spoiler. Only read it if
you’ve already tried to figure it out for yourself first.

Gately, having relived his bottom, begins to recover from his infection.

But at the same time, Hal’s condition deepens. Ever since Hal ate the
mold as a child, he’s been a brilliant communicator but unable to feel.
(694: “Hal himself hasn’t had a bona fide
intensity-of-interior-life-type emotion since he was tiny … in fact he’s
far more robotic than John Wayne.”) JOI was the only one who could see
it. In life, everyone thought JOI was just being crazy but in death (as
a wraith) he can actually read Hal’s thoughts and thus confirm his view.

In life he created the Entertainment to draw Hal out (Hal moves
outwardly but doesn’t feel inside; victims of the Entertainment
feel—something—inside but don’t move outwardly). After all, as he tells
Gately, he was willing to resort to desperate measures: “No! *No!* *Any*
conversation or interchange [between father and son] is better than none
at all.” (839)

JOI’s wraith is responsible for the strange disturbances around ETA —
tripods in the forest, moving Ortho’s bed, ceiling tiles on the floor.
He knocks the ceiling tiles down in an attempt to find the DMZ. Pemulis
is too distracted with getting expelled to have Hal take it, so JOI
needs to get it to Hal some other way.

JOI also created DMZ as part of an attempt to undo the effects of Hal’s
eating mold as a child (recall: DMZ is a mold that grows on a mold). He
left it along with the Entertainment (recall: ETA kids find JOI’s
personal effects (670: “a bulky old doorless microwave…a load of old TP
cartridges…mostly unlabelled”); the tapes and the DMZ are delivered
together to the FLQ) which is about this goal (it stars a woman named
Madame Psychosis (a street name for DMZ) explaining that the thing that
killed you in your last life will give birth to you in the next). The
DMZ and the Entertainment were meant to go together for Hal. Now that
the Entertainment has escaped, he needs to get Hal the DMZ.

Hal never leaves leaves his toothbrush unattended (870), but that’s no
problem for a wraith. He places the DMZ on Hal’s brush and Hal brushes
his teeth (860) and immediately begins experiencing symptoms: Ortho
thinks Hal’s crying when Hal thinks he’s speaking in a neutral tone
(862).

Hal’s symptoms indeed begin to reverse: he is now unable to properly
communicate feelings (people see him as either laughing hysterically or
terribly sad) but beginning to actually feel (like Gately, he spends a
lot of time lying on the floor thinking about the past — the hero of
nonaction from his essay (142)). While before, everyone could hear him
*except* JOI; now *only* JOI can hear him (since, as with Gately, he can
hear Hal’s thoughts).

By the time of the match, his symptoms are so bad he’s taken by
ambulance to the hospital (16: “the only other emergency room I have
ever been in [was] almost exactly one year back”), safely escaping the
A.F.R.’s assault. Like fellow student Otis P. Lord, he gets the bed next
to Gately. Joelle (who is at the hospital for a meeting) visits Gately
on her way out and recognizes Hal. She tells them both about the hunt
for the lethal Entertainment and the resulting Continental Emergency and
they all go to dig up JOI’s grave. They persuade John Wayne, a spy for
the A.F.R., to become a double agent and help sneak them into JOI’s
Quebec burial site. Wayne presumably tells the A.F.R. he is actually a
triple agent — that he will steal the tape as soon as Hal digs it up.
But, as with Marathe, his loyalties are ultimately even-numbered (n40).
The A.F.R. finds out and brutally murders him, which is why he can’t win
the WhataBurger (16f).

As Gately forsees:

> he’s with a very sad kid and they’re in a graveyard digging some dead
> guy’s head up and it’s really important, like Continental-Emergency
> important, and Gately’s the best digger but he’s wicked hungry, like
> irresistibly hungry, and he’s eating with both hands out of huge
> economy-size bags of corporate snacks so he can’t really dig, while it
> gets later and later and the sad kid is trying to scream at Gately
> that the important thing was buried in the guy’s head and to divert
> the Continental Emergency to start digging the guy’s head up before
> it’s too late, but the kid moves his mouth but nothing comes out, and
> Joelle van D. appears … while the sad kid holds something terrible up
> by the hair and makes the face of somebody shouting in panic: *Too
> Late*. (934)

It’s too late because someone got there first and took the
anti-Entertainment cartridge (126) embedded in JOI’s head (31). Whoever
took it is presumably the person who’s made and mailed the extant
copies. It couldn’t be the A.F.R. or O.U.S. or they wouldn’t still be
searching for it. It probably wasn’t the F.L.Q. because they didn’t know
how to read master cartridges—they just thought they were blank tapes in
their displays were blank. (483n205) It couldn’t be Avril acting alone;
she has problems but she’s not that kind of cold-blooded killer. It had
to have been Orin.^[1](#fn:o)^

Orin (who never attended his father’s funeral) went to the gravesite and
dug up his father, releasing the wraith in the process. (244: “After a
burial, rural Papineau-region Québecers purportedly drill a small hole
down from ground level all the way down through the lid of the coffin,
to let out the soul, if it wants out.”) Orin, who is such a partisan of
his father that he feels the need to repeatedly ruin the lives of people
like his mother, has been mailing the tapes to his father’s enemies in
revenge: disapproving film critics in Berkeley and the medical attaché
(whose affair with his mother drove Himself especially wild) in Boston.
It’s possible he’s being influenced by the wraith in these actions.

After the A.F.R. releases roaches into his giant glass tumbler, Orin
cuts a deal with the A.F.R. and gives them the tape in return for
letting him live. (He’s apparently still alive on p. 14.) The A.F.R.
uses the tape to set off some sort of intracontinental conflagaration
(16: “some sort of ultra-mach fighter too high overhead to hear slices
the sky from south to north”) which apparently topples the Gentle
administration (n114: “[Y.G. is] the very last year of Subsidized
Time”).

As seen in Chapter 1, Hal’s condition deepens until he literally can’t
communicate at all, but no longer feels like a robot anymore. (12: “I’m
not a machine. I feel and believe.”) The only thing he has left is
tennis and he looks forward to playing Ortho Stice in the final match of
the WhataBurger. But Stice is possessed by his father (in the
manuscript, Stice is called “the Wraithster”), so the novel ends as Hal
finally gets to really interface with his father — in the only way he
has left.

*Thanks to [Jeff Halley](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ijend#c39) and
Joe Giacona for help with the part about the DMZ.*

* * * * *

1.  Recall that “the padded mailer [received by the attaché] is
    postmarked suburban Phoenix area in Arizona U.S.A.” (36) Also, Orin
    mentions being “in line in the post office” even though, as Hal
    points out, “You hate snail-mail. And you quit mailing the Moms the
    pseudo-form-replies two years ago.” (244) Orin doesn’t reply to
    that.

    And: “There was reason to think M. DuPlessis had received his
    original copies from this relative, an athlete. … [He] may have
    borne responsibility for the razzles and dazzles of Berkeley and
    Boston, U.S.A.” (723) The other appearances of the Entertainment are
    New Iberia LA (Orin played football in New Orleans LA) and Tempe AZ
    (Orin lives in Phoenix AZ). (Thanks to [Greg
    Carlisle](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0976146533), p. 477, for
    catching these.) [↩](#fnref:o)




Tim DeLaughter and the Boundary of Spectacle
============================================

September 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/spree)

* * * * *

The traditional symphony is a highly formal event. Musicians, in formal
clothes, sit in a carefully-designed arrangement high above the audience
who (also usually in formal clothes) sits in seats and applauds at
formally-appropriate moments (recall the odd paradox of most of the
audience unsure when to clap; is it the end of the piece or just the end
of the movement?). The music performed is also often formal, classical
music, like fine art generally, typically signifying something a cut
above everyday life.

This is challenged somewhat by things like the Boston Pops, a symphony
who, for the 4th of July, performed “Sweet Caroline” with Neil Diamond
to a crowd of people sitting on towels on the lawn waving flags. But,
even so, the main feeling was of people crowding around to see something
spectacular — *look, it’s Neil Diamond!*

The sense was rather different when, wandering past techs and grips, Tim
DeLaughter, wearing the dingiest of street clothes, climbed over a
forest of cables to the microphone and begun talking about how his
father used to beat him for imitating Neil Diamond. *Look, it’s him!*
was thoroughly tempered with *Who is this guy?*

“So, you know, I would say things like *(Neil Diamond voice:) Please
pass the potatoes! I’m so very hungry!* [pats his stomach] and he’d say
*Don’t you dare do that again* and bitchslap me [mimes bitchslapping]
and of course I’d do it again and again.”

And so the audience was throughly puzzled by the time he, rather
casually, dropped in the line “Let me bring out the band” and the couple
dozen members wandered out onto the stage, also in street clothes. But
soon the lights faded and Tim grabbed the microphone and in a burst of
light and music, they launched into a rousing version of “Sweet
Caroline.”

Tim pranced on stage like no one you’ve ever seen and the audience
bounced up and down and sung along with enthusiasm, but in a throughly
confused manner. No one was quite sure how seriously to take a
disheveled-looking bunch of dancers, violinists, trumpeters, and
harpists led by a guy in street clothes prancing around doing his best
imitation of Neil Diamond. (Although, God, nothing can top the chorus
girls flicking their hair in tune with “Live and Let Die.”)

A rock band is a special kind of spectacle all on its own — think of
Beatlesmania, for example, or how “rock star” is a generalized term for
a special kind of awe-inspiring celebrity — and Tim did everything he
could to both heighten this sense and demolish it. They’d launch into
furious imposing rock songs and the audience would scream and reach
toward them, but then the rock would fade down into a quieter symphonic
bridge section and Tim would sit down on the stage and chat casually
with someone in the front row, while still playing the bridge’s main
repeating theme on his guitar.

All the usual audience-musician relations were subverted. Musicians
often point their mic at the crowd to inspire them to scream the key
line in a chorus. Tim, in the middle of a verse, would bend down and
point the microphone in a fan’s face and let them sing it. And while
some musicians “bodysurf” on the crowd’s hands, while he sang about
being “under the ocean”, Tim literally lay down on the beer-drenched
sticky floor and crawled between their legs.

The tension was only heightened in the second act, when the band
appeared in their famous white robes, but approached the stage by
walking through the audience, saying hi to everyone and hugging like old
friends. Tim frequently jumped down into the audience and hugged people
in the middle of singing, the microphone in one hand reaching around
their back to meet his face on the other side.

The fundamental tension of celebrity is appearing to the world as
someone superhuman — achiever of great deeds, seen only in airbrushed
photos and on giant screens, known by vastly more people than they
themselves know — while still, at base, being a human like everyone
else, the kind of person who goes down the street to get a sandwich and
chats with people on the subway and all the other humdrum pieces of
daily life. It’s an odd contradiction and never have I seen it presented
better than watching the Polyphonic Spree on stage last night.


The New Science of Causation
============================

September 21, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newcausation)

* * * * *

It seems like each new day brings another one of those headlines:
regular sleep “linked to” life expectancy, playing video games
“associated with” surgical prowess, bullies “at risk” of becoming
criminals, and “does breastfeeding reduce a baby’s blood pressure?” (the
old rhetorical question gambit). Sometimes the articles are clear: the
research has only found a correlation between two variables —
breastfeeding and low blood pressure were found together. But more
often, they imply that causation is at work — that breastfeeding
*causes* lower blood pressure.

You’ve surely heard that old statistics adage: correlation does not
imply causation. Just because breastfeeding and low blood pressure are
found together doesn’t mean the first caused the second. Perhaps the
second caused the first (moms might prefer to keep breastfeeding calmer
babies) or some other thing caused both of them (maybe moms who don’t
work both tend to breastfeed and stress their kids less). You can’t tell
from correlation alone.

Indeed, the philosopher David Hume argued that we could *never* know
whether causation was at work. “Solidity, extension, motion; these
qualities are all complete in themselves, and never point out any other
event which may result from them,” he wrote. But not causation: “One
event follows another; but we never can observe any tie between them.
They seem conjoined, but never connected.”

And, as philosophers since Plato and Sextus Empiricus have argued, such
evidence can deceive us. Imagine finding a button and, each time you
press it, a beep is heard. Normally, we’d assume that the button always
causes the beep. But we’d be wrong — one day the power goes out and the
button does nothing.

Which is why, centuries later, Karl Pearson, the founder of mathematical
statistics, banned the notion of causality from the discipline, calling
it “a fetish amidst the inscrutable arcana of modern science” and
insisting that just by understanding simple correlation one “grasped the
essence of the conception of association between cause and effect.”

His followers have kept it banished ever since. “Considerations of
causality should be treated as they have always been in statistics:
preferably not at all,” wrote a former president of the Biometric
Society. “It would be very healthy if more researchers abandon thinking
of and using terms such as cause and effect,” insisted another prominent
social scientist.

And there the matter has stayed. Causality is a concept as meaningless
as “the soul” and just as inappropriate for modern mathematical science.
And yet, somehow, this doesn’t seem quite right. If causation is nothing
but a meaningless word that laypeople have layered over correlation,
then why the ceaseless insistence that “correlation does not imply
causation”? Why are our thoughts filled with causal comments (he made me
do it!) and never correlational ones?

The result is exceptionally strange. Statistics has no mathematical way
to express the notion “mud does not cause rain”. It can say mud is
correlated with rain (i.e. that there’s a high probability of seeing mud
if you see rain), no problem, but expressing the simple causal concept —
the kind of thing any five-year-old would know — is impossible.

Statisticians may have never had to confront this problem but, luckily
for us, Artificial Intelligence researchers have. It turns out if you’re
making a robot, having a notion of causality is essential — not just
because it’s the only way to understand the humans, but because it’s the
only way to get anything done! How are you supposed to turn the lights
on if you don’t know that it’s the light-switch and not the clicking
noise that causes it?

The result is that in recent years several teams of AI researchers have
turned their focus from building robots to building mathematical tools
for dealing with causality. At the forefront is Judea Pearl (author of
the book *Causality*, Cambridge University Press) and his group at UCLA
and Clark Glymour (author of *The Mind’s Arrows*, MIT Press), Peter
Spirtes, and their colleagues at Carnegie Mellon. The result is a quiet
revolution in the field of statistics — one most practicing
statisticians are still unaware of.

They started by dismissing Plato’s skepticism about the problem.
Granted, they say, we may never know for sure whether the button
*always* causes the beep, but that’s too stringent a demand. Science
never knows anything for sure — the best we can hope for is extracting
the most knowledge from the evidence we have. Or, as William James put
it, “To know is one thing, and to know for certain that we know is
another.”

Next, they created a new mathematical function to formalize our notion
of causality: *do(…)*. *do* expresses the notion of intervening and
actually trying something. Thus, to mathematically express the notion
that mud does not cause rain, we can say P(rain | do(mud=true)) =
P(rain) — in other words, the chance of rain given that you made it
muddy is the same as the chance of rain in general.

But causes rarely comes in pairs like these — more often it comes in
complicated chains: clouds cause rain which causes both mud and wet
clothing and the latter causes people to find a change of clothes. And
so the researchers express these as networks, usually called causal
Bayes nets or graphical causal models, which show each thing (clouds,
rain, mud) as a node and the causal relationships as arrows between
them:

       (clouds)
          |
          |
          v
        (rain)
         /\
        /  \
       /    \
      v      v
    (mud)  (wet)
             |
             |
             v
          (change)

And all this was just the warm-up act. Their real breakthrough was this:
just as kids can discover causes by observation, computers can discern
causes from data. Now obviously the easiest way to do this is just to
measure what happens when you do(X=x) directly — this, for example, is
what randomized controlled trials do. Kids do it by dropping a fork on
the floor and seeing if this causes Mom to pick it up; scientists do it
by randomly giving some people a real drug and others just a placebo.
The result is that we can be sure of the cause — after all, it was *we*
who dropped the fork and gave out the drug; nothing else could be
sneaking in and causing it.

But in most cases we don’t have this luxury. We’d like to know whether a
new tax policy will cause the economy to tank *before* we enact it; we’d
like to know whether smoking causes cancer without forcing kids to
smoke; and even in randomized controlled trials, we can give half the
patients the real drug, but we can’t make them take it. If the drug
being tested makes someone so horribly sick that they stop taking it and
then get better, drug trials still count that as a victory for the drug!

Obviously we can’t always know such things just from observing, but in a
surprising number of cases we can. And the researchers have developed a
mathematical method — called the *do*-calculus — for determining just
when you can. Feed it a Bayes network of variables, their relationships,
and their values, and it will return back what it knows and with what
certainty.

Thus, in an example Pearl frequently uses, tobacco companies used to
argue that the correlation between smoking and cancer was simply because
there were certain genes that made people both more likely to smoke
*and* more likely to get cancer. It didn’t matter if they quit smoking —
their genes would lead cancer to get them anyway. Pearl shows that if we
assume only smoking causes tar deposits on the lungs and the tar
deposits are the only way smoking causes cancer, we can simply measure
the tar deposits and calculate whether the tobacco companies are right.

Or, in another example in his book *Causality*, he analyzes data from a
study on a cholesterol-reducing drug. Since whether people got the
placebo or not is unassociated with any other variables (because it was
randomly assigned) if we merely assume that receiving the real drug has
*some* influence on whether people take it, we can calculate the
effectiveness of the drug even with imperfect compliance. Indeed, we can
even estimate how effective the drug would have been for people who were
assigned it but didn’t take it!

And that’s not all — Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour have developed an
algorithm (known as PC, for Peter-Clark) that, given just the data, will
do its best to calculate the causal network behind it. You can download
the software implementing it, called [TETRAD
IV](http://www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/tetrad/tetrad4.html), for free from
their department’s website — it even has a nice graphical interface for
drawing and displaying the networks.

As an experiment, I fed it some data from the IRS about 2005 income tax
returns. It informed me that the percentage people donate to charity is
correlated with the number of dependents they have, which in turn
correlates with how much people receive from EITC. That amount, along
with average income, causes how many people are on EITC. Average income
is correlated with the tax burden which is correlated with inequality.
All interesting and reasonable — and the result of just a few minutes’
work.

The applications for such tools are endless. As Pearl points out, they
have the possibility to radically improved how statistics are used in
medicine, epidemiology, economics, sociology, and law. And, as Glymour
observes, it lets us better understand results in neuroscience and
psychology. Take *The Bell Curve*, the 1992 bestseller that argued
blacks had lower IQs, causing poorer performance in school and thus
lower-paying jobs and more crime. Glymour shows, by applying the
*do*-calculus, these results only hold if you assume that there are no
other interactions between the variables (e.g. that parental attitude
toward learning doesn’t affect both IQ and performance in school). But
the PC algorithm and TETRAD IV can demonstrate otherwise.

Such results may be a revolution in social science, but compared to
building human-like robots, they’re child’s play. That’s certainly the
impression one gets from Pearl. Discussing his work at a conference of
Artificial Intelligence researchers, he said:

> One of the reasons I find these areas to be fertile grounds to try out
> new ideas is that, unlike AI, tangible rewards can be reaped from
> solving relative small problems. Problems involving barely 4 to 5
> variables, which we in AI regard as toy-problems, carry tremendous
> payoffs in public health and social science.
>
> Billions of dollars are invested each year on various public-health
> studies: Is chocolate ice-cream good for you or bad for you? Would red
> wine increase or decrease your heart rate? etc. etc.
>
> The same applies to the social sciences. Would increasing police
> budget decrease or increase crime rates? Is the Colorado school
> incident due to TV violence or failure of public education? The
> Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research has
> distributed about 800 gigabytes worth of such studies in 1993 alone.
>
> Unfortunately the causal-analytical methodology currently available to
> researchers in these fields is rather primitive, and every innovation
> can make a tremendous difference. […] This has been changing recently
> as new techniques are beginning to emerge from AI laboratories. I
> predict that a quiet revolution will take place in the next decade in
> the way causality is handled in statistics, epidemiology, social
> science, economics, and business. While news of this revolution will
> never make it to DARPA’s newsletter, and even NSF is not equipped to
> appreciate or support it, it will nevertheless have enormous
> intellectual and technological impact on our society.

For science’s sake, I hope he’s right.


A Summary/Explanation of John Maynard Keynes’ *General Theory*
==============================================================

September 22, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/generaltheory)

* * * * *

With the recent economic crisis, there has been much talk of John
Maynard Keynes and his economics. Keynes, the story goes, figured out
the causes of the Great Depression and in doing so revolutionized the
field of economics. Some conservative economists have forgotten or
ignored his work, but society as a whole remembers his basic discovery:
you get out of downturns by spending money.

Reading Keynes’ *General Theory of Employment, Money, and Interest* then
is a sobering experience. For the book is, indeed, truly brilliant, a
definite work of genius. It’s the best book on the economy I’ve ever
read; indeed, it’s one of the best books I’ve ever read. Everyone has
seen bits and pieces of wit quoted from the book, but Keynes weaves them
into a beautiful tapestry that explains the whole of the modern economy.
And yet, the book is a necessary now as it was then: economics has not
learned a single one of his lessons.

This is a depressing thought, especially since Keynes throughout seems
optimistic that once he’s explained everything so clearly, economics
will be back on the right track. But politics has triumphed over logic
and we’ve forgotten all the crucial things he explained.

Perhaps this is why it has a reputation for being a very tough book — so
difficult that even economists can’t follow it. But I think this is
entirely due to a difference in philosophies: the *General Theory* was
the first book on economics I could really understand. And that’s
because, unlike most economics books, it *makes sense* — the theories it
proposes comport with the real world, instead of taking place in some
fantasyland of perfect competition.

Still, the book isn’t exactly a smooth read. Keynes uses some archaic
language and is trying to communicate some complicated ideas. There’s no
math, but there’s still a lot to chew on. So I thought I’d try my best
at an explanation/summary. It’s a long book, so if you’re in a hurry,
you might prefer [my shorter summary of the fundamental
ideas](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/keynes).

* * * * *

[The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/)
[full text]

Book I: Introduction
--------------------

**1:** This chapter cheekily consists of a single paragraph. It says the
book is an attempt to show that classical economics (basically that
summarized by Alfred Marshall, including Ricardo, Mill, Edgeworth, and
Pigou) addresses only a special case of the economy, while this book
outlines a more general theory.

**2:** The classical theory of employment says the labor market is just
another market: people get paid what they make and people only work if
they get paid enough to make it worth it. Since it seemed unlikely that
society had run out of money-making jobs, it was assumed that
unemployment was caused either by people not knowing where the jobs were
(frictional unemployment) or insisting on being paid more than they
could make (voluntary unemployment).

It seems difficult to explain the high unemployment of the Great
Depression this way, but economists didn’t see how it could be
otherwise. So their solution was simple: to end unemployment, people
just needed to be willing to work for less.

What this amounts to is Say’s Law: supply creates its own demand. If
there are people around willing to work, jobs will spring up to make use
of them. If people are unemployed, it must be because they’re refusing
to take the job.

There are two obvious problems with this. First, people may refuse to
work for a lower nominal wage when they’ll accept working for a lower
real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) wage. That is, if management decides to
pay people \$4 an hour instead of \$5, people might go on strike, but
nobody ever goes on strike demanding a raise because the cost of milk
has gone up. (So inflation might actually be a better solution than wage
cuts.)

Second, if wages go down, then the cost of making things goes down,
which means that prices go down, which means that in real terms wages
end up staying about the same.

Keynes has found a crack in the classical theory. The first half of this
book will be dedicated to prying it open. The second half is filling it
in.

**3:** When people get money, they spend some of it — but not all of it.
And businesses choose whether to hire people based on how much they
expect to sell. But how much they sell is exactly dependent on how much
people spend.

So it’s how much people spend that determines employment. But this is
totally consistent with there being unemployment — if people aren’t
buying, businesses aren’t selling, so they fire people (who then buy
less).

Indeed, this problem will be worse in richer countries, since the more
people make the less of it they need to spend and thus less money is
used to hire people. (The details of how the remainder gets invested has
to do with interest and will be addressed later.)

Since this seems so basic, Keynes is puzzled at how it’s been so
ignored:

> The completeness of the [classical] victory is something of a
> curiosity and a mystery. It must have been due to a complex of
> suitabilities in the doctrine to the environment into which it was
> projected. That it reached conclusions quite different from what the
> ordinary uninstructed person would expect, added, I suppose, to its
> intellectual prestige. That its teaching, translated into practice,
> was austere and often unpalatable, lent it virtue. That it was adapted
> to carry a vast and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty.
> That it could explain much social injustice and apparent cruelty as an
> inevitable incident in the scheme of progress, and the attempt to
> change such things as likely on the whole to do more harm than good,
> commended it to authority. That it afforded a measure of justification
> to the free activities of the individual capitalist, attracted to it
> the support of the dominant social force behind authority.
>
> But although the doctrine itself has remained unquestioned by orthodox
> economists up to a late date, its signal failure for purposes of
> scientific prediction has greatly impaired, in the course of time, the
> prestige of its practitioners. For professional economists, after
> Malthus, were apparently unmoved by the lack of correspondence between
> the results of their theory and the facts of observation;—a
> discrepancy which the ordinary man has not failed to observe, with the
> result of his growing unwillingness to accord to economists that
> measure of respect which he gives to other groups of scientists whose
> theoretical results are confirmed by observation when they are applied
> to the facts.
>
> The celebrated optimism of traditional economic theory, which has led
> to economists being looked upon as Candides, who, having left this
> world for the cultivation of their gardens, teach that all is for the
> best in the best of all possible worlds provided we will let well
> alone, is also to be traced, I think, to their having neglected to
> take account of the drag on prosperity which can be exercised by an
> insufficiency of effective demand. For there would obviously be a
> natural tendency towards the optimum employment of resources in a
> society which was functioning after the manner of the classical
> postulates. It may well be that the classical theory represents the
> way in which we should like our economy to behave. But to assume that
> it actually does so is to assume our difficulties away.

Book II: Definitions and Ideas
------------------------------

**4:** The next three chapters aren’t so much part of the argument as
attempts to clear up some basic concepts and objections.

We start by observing it’s impossible to measure things like “net
output” or “price level” accurately — you’re always trying to compare
qualitatively different things and run into no end of difficulties.

> To say that net output to-day is greater, but the price-level lower,
> than ten years ago or one year ago, is a proposition of a similar
> character to the statement that Queen Victoria was a better queen but
> not a happier woman than Queen Elizabeth — a proposition not without
> meaning and not without interest, but unsuitable as material for the
> differential calculus. Our precision will be a mock precision if we
> try to use such partly vague and non-quantitative concepts as the
> basis of a quantitative analysis.

We can’t measure net output, but we can count the number of people
employed. In general, if more people are working then more stuff is
getting made, although this obviously isn’t a perfect connection. But
employment is kind of a more interesting number and it will have to do.

So we’ll use only two types of counts: those of actual currency
(money-values) and those of people (employment). And while workers are
obviously not all equivalent the way dollar bills are, we can take an
hour of unskilled labor as our standard and count people with special
skills as multiples of an hour of unskilled labor. Thus if someone makes
twice as much per hour as an unskilled laborer, we’ll count each hour
they work as two unskilled hours. We’ll call these hours labor-units and
we’ll call the money that gets paid for them wage-units. Thus the total
amount spent on wages equals the wage-unit times the number of
labor-units.

[AS: Obviously this accounting fiction isn’t particularly realistic
since, in reality, the multiples people get paid change as the wage-unit
goes up. Let’s say I’m a lawyer who makes \$300 an hour and minimum wage
is \$5 an hour. If the minimum wage is doubled to \$10 an hour, I’m not
suddenly going to get paid \$600 an hour, even though my relative
productivity hasn’t changed. Keynes seems to suggest this can be modeled
as “a rapid liability to change in the supply of labor;” I guess that’s
possible.]

And as for some people being better at some jobs than others, we just
pretend that’s an artifact of the equipment they use. In other words, as
employment goes up and we run out of skilled truck-builders, we say the
truck factory is getting less efficient. (If, indeed, there’s nobody
left who can build the trucks, we say the truck factory’s efficiency has
gone to zero.)

As problematic as this is, Keynes points out that it’s a lot more
realistic than the classical theory, which just seems to magically
assume everyone is paid in proportion to their productivity. By
subsuming more efficient people with their machinery, Keynes says he
better deals with the usual case, which is that the increase in
efficiency goes to their boss (who owns the machines). And when more
efficient workers actually are paid more, he takes that into account as
noted above.

**5:** Businesses make production decisions not based on sales or
anything solidly measurable, but on personal opinions: expectations.
These can be either short-term expectations (the barrista will be given
the day off if management doesn’t expect any customers) or long-term
expectations (Starbucks won’t open up a new story if they expect coffee
consumption to start going down).

Either way, new expectations don’t always take effect immediately (if
you just opened a new store and then decide it wasn’t worth it, you
don’t immediately close it). And the process of adjusting can have some
odd effects: if you need to quickly ramp up production, you might keep
hiring until you have more employees than you really need in the
long-run. You use the extra people to get you up to speed, then you lay
them off. The result is “a gradual crescendo in the level of employment,
rising to a peak and then declining to the new long-period level.” This
can happen even if you don’t expect to sell more things, but just a
slightly different thing: you “overhire” to get up to speed on the new
model, but then fire people until you’re back down to your previous
level.

> An uninterrupted process of transition, such as the above, to a new
> long-period position can be complicated in detail. But the actual
> course of events is more complicated still. For the state of
> expectation is liable to constant change, a new expectation being
> superimposed long before the previous change has fully worked itself
> out; so that the economic machine is occupied at any given time with a
> number of overlapping activities, the existence of which is due to
> various past states of expectation.

That said, today’s decisions are based on the conditions of today and
expectations about tomorrow — not on past expectations or the conditions
of the past. And, in practice, people don’t calculate their expectations
from scratch each morning. They keep doing what they did yesterday
unless they have a reason to change. Long-term expectations can’t be
easily checked, so when they do change, they often change suddenly. Thus
they can’t even be approximately estimated.

**6:** When you’re producing something, there are a couple of things
involved. One is the amount of capital and equipment and so on you use
up, which we’ll call the *user cost*. Another is the amount you pay to
employees and other companies and so on, the *factor cost*. These two
combined are the *prime cost*. The *entrepreneur’s income* is the value
of his output less the prime cost — that’s what he tries to maximize.

Entrepreneurs can also lose capital due to unavoidable events — a market
crash, an earthquake, the passage of time. These are *supplementary
costs*. In addition, there are the unavoidable and unforeseen, which
we’ll call *windfall loss*. We’ll define *net income* as just income
minus supplementary costs, since people can’t really be blamed for the
unforeseen events.

The *total income* of the community is just the amount sold minus the
user cost. And *total consumption* is just all the stuff that isn’t sold
to other businesses. [AS: I’ve been saying businesses because I find it
clearer, but Keynes actually says entrepreneurs. I think I also use this
kind of interchangeably with capitalists. Sorry.] *Saving*, of course,
is just income minus consumption.

*Investment* is just the amount of current output that isn’t consumed.
But since saving is just the amount of income that isn’t consumed and
income is just output (output is always output to someone), savings
necessarily equals investment.

[AS: This seems to be a little controversial (and, indeed, tends to be a
bit confusing), but let’s just accept it as a quirky definition, not any
kind of factual claim.]

**7:** Keynes spends the chapter defending his decision to define
savings as equal to investment. [AS: I think he only ends up in making
things more confusing, but maybe I’m missing something.]

Book III: The Propensity to Consume
-----------------------------------

**8:** We return now to our main argument. Earlier we said people spend
the money they get, but not all of it. What changes how much they spend?
Not much, Keynes argues. (Maybe large changes in interest rates, but
those are rare.)

“The fundamental psychological law,” he says, is that, on average, the
amount people spend increases as the amount they make increases, but not
as quickly. (If you make \$50K a year, you might spend \$40K of it. If
you make \$1M, you might spend \$500K of it. Obviously a lot more in
absolute terms, but far less proportionately.) And this is especially
true in the short-term — people’s habits take time to catch up with
their incomes.

But this means that as national income increases, a smaller proportion
of it will get spent, so more of it will have to be invested. And when
national income falls, a larger proportion gets spent as people dip into
savings and governments go into deficit. This is fortunate, because
lower consumption also means lower income (when people buy less,
businesses make less, so they pay you less). If consumption fell at the
same rate as income, we’d fall into a downward spiral: lower consumption
would mean lower income, which in turn would mean lower consumption, and
soon we’d all be out of a job.

“Consumption — to repeat the obvious — is the sole end and object of all
economic activity.” What are we making things for if not to use them?
People can either be put to work making things for people to use today
or making things for people to use tomorrow, but that tomorrow “cannot
be pushed indefinitely into the future.” After all, an hour of labor
cannot be “saved” and put into a bank for a rainy day! If people are out
of work now, the time they’re wasting will never be recovered. [AS: This
is truly brilliant. It’s hard to convey the excitement I felt when
reading this.] Saving money for the future is not the same as making
things for the future — it’s only the latter that’s useful.

But it’s not easy to think of useful things to make for the future.
Eventually, we’re forced to make things for today. But as our incomes
increase, we spend less on things today. And there’s our trap: if we
don’t make things for tomorrow and we don’t make things for today,
people are forced out of work since there’s nothing for them to make.

Another way to look at it is the more stuff we make for tomorrow, the
less stuff we need to make tomorrow. And then what do we do? At some
point we just need to consume more stuff.

People seem to recognize this when it comes to government making stuff.
‘“What will you do,” it is asked, “when you have built all the houses
and roads and town halls and electric grids and water supplies and so
forth which the stationary population of the future can be expected to
require?”’ But the same logic applies to private investment. What will
we do when we’ve built all the factories the people of the future can be
expected to use?

Money can’t survive on its own. If we don’t ever spend it, it becomes
worthless.

**9:** How does raising interest rates affect consumption? We’ve said it
doesn’t have much effect on people’s *propensity* to consume, but a
higher interest rate means it’s more expensive to borrow money, which
means companies invest less, which means incomes are reduced. (Since
savings=investment, incomes are reduced such that the amount left over
for savings equals the lesser amount now invested. [AS: This is the
first use of that suspicious definition.]) Most people think that as the
interest rate goes up, spending goes down and saving goes up, but this
shows that saving and spending both decrease.

> The more virtuous we are, the more determinedly thrifty, the more
> obstinately orthodox in our national and personal finance, the more
> our incomes will have to fall when interest rises relatively to the
> marginal efficiency of capital. Obstinacy can bring only a penalty and
> no reward. For the result is inevitable.
>
> Thus, after all, the actual rates of aggregate saving and spending do
> not depend on Precaution, Foresight, Calculation, Improvement,
> Independence, Enterprise, Pride or Avarice. Virtue and vice play no
> part. It all depends on how far the rate of interest is favourable to
> investment, after taking account of the marginal efficiency of
> capital. No, this is an overstatement. If the rate of interest were so
> governed as to maintain continuous full employment, Virtue would
> resume her sway; — the rate of capital accumulation would depend on
> the weakness of the propensity to consume. Thus, once again, the
> tribute that classical economists pay to her is due to their concealed
> assumption that the rate of interest always is so governed.

**10:** We’ve established that an increase in investment leads to an
increase in income. But how much? Even if you hire people for
investment, the money those people get paid in turn gets spent on
additional consumption, increasing employment indirectly as well. (Of
course, this is only true until we hit full employment — then prices
just inflate.)

There must be an investment multiplier — call it *k* — such that an
extra \$1 invested leads to \$*k* increase in income. And there must be
a similar employment multiplier (*k’*) where for each person hired for a
job, *k’* people get hired in total.

But spending can have negative effects as well. [AS: Keynes apparently
has government investment — i.e. stimulus — in mind here, although he
never really comes out and says it.] If the interest rate goes up, that
will slow investment. If people lose “confidence” because of all the
spending, they may decide to hold onto their money. And some of the
money can “leak” out to other countries. But this just weakens the
multiplier, it doesn’t eliminate it.

Recall that the classical theory said people needed to be paid enough to
compensate them for their distaste for working. But if you’ve been
unemployed long enough, you might actually *want* to work. If that’s
true, even wasting money is a good thing. “Pyramid-building,
earthquakes, even wars may serve to increase wealth, if the education of
our statesmen on the principles of the classical economics stands in the
way of anything better.”

> It is curious how common sense, wriggling for an escape from absurd
> conclusions, has been apt to reach a preference for wholly “wasteful”
> forms of loan expenditure rather than for *partly* wasteful forms,
> which, because they are not *wholly* wasteful, tend to be judged on
> strict “business” principles. For example, unemployment relief
> financed by loans is more readily accepted than the financing of
> improvements at a charge below the current rate of interest; whilst
> the form of digging holes in the ground known as gold-mining, which
> not only adds nothing whatever to the real wealth of the world but
> involves the disutility of labour, is the most acceptable of all
> solutions.

(Recall that at this time the world was still on the gold standard and
thus mining for gold was equivalent to printing new money.)

> If the Treasury were to fill old bottles with banknotes, bury them at
> suitable depths in disused coalmines which are then filled up to the
> surface with town rubbish, and leave it to private enterprise on
> well-tried principles of laissez-faire to dig the notes up again (the
> right to do so being obtained, of course, by tendering for leases of
> the note-bearing territory), there need be no more unemployment and,
> with the help of the repercussions, the real income of the community,
> and its capital wealth also, would probably become a good deal greater
> than it actually is. It would, indeed, be more sensible to build
> houses and the like; but if there are political and practical
> difficulties in the way of this, the above would be better than
> nothing.
>
> The analogy between this expedient and the goldmines of the real world
> is complete. At periods when gold is available at suitable depths
> experience shows that the real wealth of the world increases rapidly;
> and when but little of it is so available, our wealth suffers
> stagnation or decline. Thus gold-mines are of the greatest value and
> importance to civilisation. just as wars have been the only form of
> large-scale loan expenditure which statesmen have thought justifiable,
> so gold-mining is the only pretext for digging holes in the ground
> which has recommended itself to bankers as sound finance; and each of
> these activities has played its part in progress-failing something
> better. To mention a detail, the tendency in slumps for the price of
> gold to rise in terms of labour and materials aids eventual recovery,
> because it increases the depth at which gold-digging pays and lowers
> the minimum grade of ore which is payable.

(Keynes goes on to contrast gold-mining with building new houses which,
being actually useful, has the side effect of decreasing the rent of old
ones.)

> Ancient Egypt was doubly fortunate, and doubtless owed to this its
> fabled wealth, in that it possessed two activities, namely,
> pyramid-building as well as the search for the precious metals, the
> fruits of which, since they could not serve the needs of man by being
> consumed, did not stale with abundance. The Middle Ages built
> cathedrals and sang dirges. Two pyramids, two masses for the dead, are
> twice as good as one; but not so two railways from London to York.
> Thus **we are so sensible, have schooled ourselves to so close a
> semblance of prudent financiers, taking careful thought before we add
> to the “financial” burdens of posterity by building them houses to
> live in**, that we have no such easy escape from the sufferings of
> unemployment. We have to accept them as an inevitable result of
> applying to the conduct of the State the maxims which are best
> calculated to “enrich” an individual by enabling him to pile up claims
> to enjoyment which he does not intend to exercise at any definite
> time. [emphasis added]

Book IV: The Inducement to Invest
---------------------------------

**11:** Imagine you get a new widget-making machine. There’s the value
of the widgets you expect [AS: there’s that word again] it to produce,
less the cost of its inputs and maintenance. Call that the *yield*. Then
there’s the cost of creating one more new widget-making machine. Call
that the *supply cost*. The *marginal efficiency of capital* is the
yield less the supply cost. [AS: Marginal efficiency of capital comes up
a lot, so we’ll save time by calling it “your expected return.”]

Of course there’s lots of different things you can invest in; we’re
assuming that you do whatever maximizes your expected return. And
obviously you’ll keep borrowing money and investing it until your
expected return reaches the market rate of interest.

It’s through the expected yield that changes in the value of money
affect output. If people expect inflation, then expected yields go up
and people invest more. Deflation does the opposite.

(Tyler Cowen, in his critical comments on the *General Theory* is struck
by a throw-off clause in this chapter: Keynes says that it’s unlikely
interest rates will go up if people expect inflation, since if people
expected inflation prices would have gone up already. [He
writes](http://www.marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2009/04/keyness-general-theory-chapter-eleven.html): ”This
simple yet powerful point doesn’t get the attention it ought to. 
Storage costs for goods and services may eliminate this paradox but
perhaps not completely.  It is striking how few economists have thought
this problem through.”)

**12:** As we noted before, capitalists invest if they expect future
sales to be high. But how do they know what future sales will be? “If we
speak frankly, we have to admit that our basis of knowledge for
estimating the yield ten years hence of a railway, a copper mine, a
textile factory, the goodwill of a patent medicine, an Atlantic liner, a
building in the City of London amounts to little and sometimes to
nothing; or even five years hence.”

In olden days, what happened was that rough-riding men of business
thought taking risks was manly and invested their money as a way of
life. They got it in their head that they were going to build a
railroad, and by Jove they did. They didn’t sit down and calculate
whether they could have made more money buying bonds instead. Bonds are
for wusses.

But now people invest their money in the stock market, which revises its
profitability estimates minute-by-minute. “It is as though a farmer,
having tapped his barometer after breakfast, could decide to remove his
capital from the farming business between 10 and 11 in the morning and
reconsider whether he should return to it later in the week.” And since
much new investment money is raised on the stock market, it’s these
estimates which influence new investment.

And the stock market depends on “what is, in truth, a *convention*” —
namely that the current valuation of a company is an accurate assessment
of its expected yield — that stock prices will only change if there’s
new evidence suggesting the yield will be different. Thus, even though
we actually have no clue what the yield might be, we all agree that the
current stock price is our best guess and instead of worrying about the
fact we actually have no clue what the “right” stock price is
whatsoever, we only have to worry about those things which will affect
it (the stock price).

So stock traders don’t sit down and try to calculate the long-term
expected yield; they try to guess the short-term change in the stock
price and trade base on that.

> This is the inevitable result of investment markets organised with a
> view to so-called “liquidity”. Of the maxims of orthodox finance none,
> surely, is more anti-social than the fetish of liquidity, the doctrine
> that it is a positive virtue on the part of investment institutions to
> concentrate their resources upon the holding of “liquid” securities.
> It forgets that there is no such thing as liquidity of investment for
> the community as a whole. The social object of skilled investment
> should be to defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance which
> envelop our future. The actual, private object of the most skilled
> investment to-day is “to beat the gun”, as the Americans so well
> express it, to outwit the crowd, and to pass the bad, or depreciating,
> half-crown to the other fellow.
>
> This battle of wits to anticipate the basis of conventional valuation
> a few months hence, rather than the prospective yield of an investment
> over a long term of years, does not even require gulls amongst the
> public to feed the maws of the professional; — it can be played by
> professionals amongst themselves. Nor is it necessary that anyone
> should keep his simple faith in the conventional basis of valuation
> having any genuine long-term validity. For it is, so to speak, a game
> of Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical Chairs — a pastime in which he is
> victor who says *Snap* neither too soon nor too late, who passes the
> Old Maid to his neighbour before the game is over, who secures a chair
> for himself when the music stops. These games can be played with zest
> and enjoyment, though all the players know that it is the Old Maid
> which is circulating, or that when the music stops some of the players
> will find themselves unseated.
>
> Or, to change the metaphor slightly, professional investment may be
> likened to those newspaper competitions in which the competitors have
> to pick out the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the
> prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice most nearly
> corresponds to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole;
> so that each competitor has to pick, not those faces which he himself
> finds prettiest, but those which he thinks likeliest to catch the
> fancy of the other competitors, all of whom are looking at the problem
> from the same point of view. It is not a case of choosing those which,
> to the best of one’s judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even
> those which average opinion genuinely thinks the prettiest. We have
> reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to
> anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to be.
> And there are some, I believe, who practise the fourth, fifth and
> higher degrees.

You might think that this just means someone who actually does sit down
and calculate expected yields could make vast profits from all the
speculators playing Snap. But calculating expected yields is much harder
than guessing what everyone else will do; there’s no reason to think
spending the same amount of time doing that is any more profitable.

And getting money for it is much harder — people don’t like it when you
tell them “Yes, the stocks you bought are worthless *now* but just wait!
Nothing real has changed, you just need to hold on and see if I’m right
in the long run.” People don’t like it when their stocks go down. They’d
much rather invest their money so that its valuation keeps going up and
up and up.

And even if they were willing to wait, why should they trust you? “For
it is in the essence of his behaviour that he should be eccentric,
unconventional and rash in the eyes of average opinion. If he is
successful, that will only confirm the general belief in his rashness;
and if in the short run he is unsuccessful, which is very likely, he
will not receive much mercy. Worldly wisdom teaches that it is better
for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.”

The more open our stock markets get, the more speculators predominate,
and the worse things get for us.

> When the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the
> activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done. The measure
> of success attained by Wall Street, regarded as an institution of
> which the proper social purpose is to direct new investment into the
> most profitable channels in terms of future yield, cannot be claimed
> as one of the outstanding triumphs of laissez-faire capitalism — which
> is not surprising, if I am right in thinking that the best brains of
> Wall Street have been in fact directed towards a different object.

A hefty tax on each trade might be the best way to discourage
speculation and thus improve the functioning of the market. You might
think (as Keynes once did) that the best solution is to just force
people to hold on to what they buy, so they have to figure out what it’s
really worth beforehand, but this will just push people to hold on to
their money. The only solution would be to force everyone to either to
buy goods or capital assets with everything they own.

And we return to the problem that many of our economic decisions depend
on our “spontaneous optimism,” our “animal spirits,” our “urge to action
rather than inaction,” not “the outcome of a weighted average of
quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative probabilities.” This
means not only that slumps get exaggerated (since they depress animal
spirits, worsening the slump) but that economic performance depends to a
large degree on keeping businessmen happy. If electing FDR gets them
depressed, they might pull back their investments and send the economy
into a slump. This isn’t a conspiracy, it’s just the natural outcome of
a system that depends on rich people feeling good. “In estimating the
prospects of investment, we must have regard, therefore, to the nerves
and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather of
those upon whose spontaneous activity it largely depends.”

As a result, it seems likely that the State, which can calculate these
things with an eye to the long-term and the social good, will take over
more and more of the job of organizing long-term investment.

[[Tyler
Cowen](http://www.marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2009/04/keyness-general-theory-chapter-12.html):
“This is the best chapter in the book and one of the most important
economics essays of all time. … The insights here have yet to be fully
mined.”]

**13:** We said before that businesses keep investing until their
expected return reaches the interest rate (so lower interest rates mean
more investment), but what determines the interest rate?

It’s often said that the interest rate is the price people demand for
saving money instead of spending it. But this clearly isn’t true —
people can save money under their mattress and not get any interest. No,
the interest rate is the “price” people demand for parting with their
cash.

“— which implies that if the rate of interest were lower, *i.e.* if the
reward for parting with cash were diminished, the aggregate amount of
cash which the public would wish to hold would exceed the available
supply, and that if the rate of interest were raised, there would be a
surplus of cash which no one would be willing to hold.” And if that’s
true then the quantity of money is the other factor that determines
interest rates. Thus the interest rate depends on people’s desire to
hoard cash — their liquidity preference (L) — and the quantity of money
(M).

Why is there a liquidity preference? Why don’t people just invest all
their money? Interest rates never go below zero, after all. “A full
explanation is complex and must wait for Chapter 15.” But we can see one
reason now: uncertainty about the expected [AS: there’s that word again]
rate of interest. If we expect interest rates to go up, we might want to
hold on to our cash and use it to buy higher-yield bonds later. And
thus, just as capital investment was driven by stock market speculation,
interest rates are driven by bond market speculation. Again we have a
tradeoff between having a market (and thus volatility) or no market (and
thus overcaution).

There are other reasons people might want to hold cash. If they expect
to do a cash transaction in the future, they’ll need to sell a bond then
— but if the interest rate has risen in the meantime, they’ll be selling
the bond at a loss. And if the interest rate falls, the economy will
grow and people will need more cash for these sorts of transactions.

OK, so we have the following model: more money reduces the interest rate
(as long as liquidity preference doesn’t go up faster), lower interest
rates increase investment (as long as expected return doesn’t fall
faster), more investment leads to more employment (as long as the
propensity to consume doesn’t fall faster), and if employment increases
prices will rise which can increase liquidity preference and thus
require more money.

The public can’t control the *amount* of hoarding, since that’s
necessarily equal to the amount of cash. All it can do is change the
price of hoarding — the interest rate.

**14:** “Certainly the ordinary man — banker, civil servant or
politician — brought up on the traditional theory, and the trained
economist also, has carried away with him the idea that whenever an
individual performs an act of saving he has done something which
automatically brings down the rate of interest … without the necessity
for any special intervention or grandmotherly care on the part of the
monetary authority.”

But we’ve seen they’re quite wrong. Saving doesn’t lower the interest
rate and thus increase investment — an increase in money does that.
Instead, saving lowers demand and thus decreases employment. In which
case, “a decreased readiness to spend will be looked on in quite a
different light.”

[AS: And so this is the famous paradox of thrift. While each person
thinks they’ll do better off by saving money instead of spending it, if
a whole country decides to save their money, they’re all worse off,
since nobody will have a job.]

[AS: I’m taking a bit from chapter 16 since it seems to really belong
here:]

“An act of individual saving means — so to speak — a decision not to
have dinner to-day.” But it is not a promise to have dinner tomorrow —
it doesn’t replace current demand with future demand; it decreases
demand altogether. And since future demand is estimated based on present
demand, it tends to decrease investment as well. Thus decreased
consumption leads to decreased employment.

It’s difficult to get people to realize that investing money doesn’t
actually lead to an increase in investments. The problem is that
capitalists aren’t buying capital per se, they’re buying an expected
yield. They don’t care how good the machine is at making widgets, what
matters is whether they can make money selling the widgets. If interest
rates go up, it no longer becomes possible for them to make money, even
though the machine remains unchanged.

**15:** The central bank can lower the short-term interest rate through
open-market operations: printing money and using it to buy short-term
government debt. But this doesn’t effect the long-term rates, which
depend on people’s expectations of what the government will do to
short-term rates. Perhaps the government should start buying and selling
long-term bonds to address this.

It’s also possible (although unlikely) that no one will believe the
government can keep rates so low and so they begin hoarding all the new
cash the government prints. “In this event the monetary authority would
have lost effective control over the rate of interest.” [AS: This, I
presume, is the liquidity trap.] “But whilst this limiting case might
become practically important in future, I know of no example of it
hitherto. … Moreover, if such a situation were to arise, it would mean
that the public authority itself could borrow through the banking system
on an unlimited scale at a nominal rate of interest.” [AS: The US,
however, is in this situation right now (2009).]

Other traps are hyperinflation (where no one wants to hold onto money)
and a financial crisis (where no one trusts the banks enough to let go
of money). And there’s the issue that even at low rates of interest,
banks still need to trust their borrowers and make enough to pay their
expenses, which may require them to raise rates.

**16:** OK, so we’re in a liquidity trap. There are all sorts of
practical problems with lowering interest below zero, so instead what
happens is that, in *laissez-faire*, employment falls to reach the new
low levels. The only thing that can save us is if “millionaires find
their satisfaction in building mighty mansions to contain their bodies
when alive and pyramids to shelter them after death, or, repenting of
their sins, erect cathedrals and endow monasteries or foreign missions.”
That’s no way to run a country.

So the government will print money to keep the interest rate at a level
corresponding to full employment. Presumably this means that interest
rates will become very low (although you don’t want them so low that
nobody’s making things to sell today). But as interest rates get lower,
it becomes profitable to invest in building things with smaller and
smaller expected yields.

If this happens, then it seems likely that within a generation expected
return will reach zero [AS: !!] and everything will reach its marginal
cost.

This gets rid of the most objectionable features of capitalism — people
could still become rich by saving money, but there would be nothing left
to invest it in, so their money wouldn’t ever grow. It would be the end
of the rentier — the rich person who grows richer by using his wealth to
exploiting others.

**17:** Let’s step back for a second. Why is money so special? After
all, a bond is just a promise to get some money in the future. Why
should it be any different from a futures contract on wheat? We could
imagine paying the future wheat contracts in terms of wheat, resulting
in a wheat interest rate. [AS: This sounds pretty ridiculous, I know,
but give it a minute.]

The big problem is that money is the one thing market processes can’t
adjust. 1) You can’t just go ahead and make it — it can’t be “grown like
a crop or manufactured like a motor-car.” 2) You can’t reclaim it from
use for other purposes — it doesn’t have any. (Land can’t be grown
either, but if we really needed to we could free some up by moving
closer together. 3) It’s very easy to store — it doesn’t spoil. Which is
why the suggestion of making it spoil (by printing money with expiration
dates, etc.) are on the right track.

Otherwise, our only relief comes from printing more money.

> Thus in the absence of money and in the absence — we must, of course,
> also suppose — of any other commodity with the assumed characteristics
> of money, the rates of interest would only reach equilibrium when
> there is full employment. Unemployment develops, that is to say,
> because people want the moon; — men cannot be employed when the object
> of desire (i.e. money) is something which cannot be produced and the
> demand for which cannot be readily choked off. There is no remedy but
> to persuade the public that green cheese is practically the same thing
> and to have a green cheese factory (i.e. a central bank) under public
> control.
>
> It is interesting to notice that the characteristic which has been
> traditionally supposed to render gold especially suitable for use as
> the standard of value, namely, its inelasticity of supply, turns out
> to be precisely the characteristic which is at the bottom of the
> trouble.

The classical view is that we are kept poor by our impatience — we
insist on spending money now instead of saving it for later, when it
will grow into more. But the truth is exactly the opposite: “That the
world after several millennia of steady individual saving, is so poor as
it is in accumulated capital-assets, is to be explained, in my opinion,
neither by the improvident propensities of mankind, nor even by the
destruction of war, but by the high liquidity-premiums formerly
attaching to the ownership of land and now attaching to money.”

18: Keynes restates the theory.

Book V: Money-wages and Prices
------------------------------

19: Now that we have the theory, we can return to the point we started
with: reducing nominal wages is unhelpful. The only thing that could
work is a one-time decrease in everyone’s wages to a new level, but that
a) is never going to happen in a democracy and b) unfairly penalizes
wage-earners over everyone else. “There are advantages in some degree of
flexibility in the wages of particular industries so as to expedite
transfers from those which are relatively declining to those which are
relatively expanding. But the money-wage level as a whole should be
maintained as stable as possible, at any rate in the short period.”

20: We’ve said that employment ultimately comes from demand. So why
should the government promote investment instead of demand? It’s because
investment comes first. If you give people money to buy more (say)
iPods, then first all the existing iPods get sold. This raises the
price, which makes Apple richer but doesn’t help any employees — and
Apple likes to save its money much more than its employees do.
Eventually they begin to run out of iPods and start investing in
additional factories to make more. And then those factories hire people
to work there, who spend their wages on other things. It works, it’s
just slow — if you want to get people employed quickly, you’re better
off starting with building the factories.

OK, so you promote investment, but how much investment? Well, until you
have full employment obviously.

**21:** Traditional economics is divided between the theory of value
(perfect competition, supply and demand, and all that good stuff) in the
main spot and then over to the side has a separate theory of money
(dealing interest rates and inflation), with no clear connection between
the two. “We have all of us become used to finding ourselves sometimes
on the one side of the moon and sometimes on the other, without knowing
what route or journey connects them, related, apparently, after the
fashion of our waking and our dreaming lives.” The right split is
between the theory of the individual industry and the theory of the
economy as a whole. Or perhaps between the stationary economy and the
shifting one, for money’s power “flows from its being a link between the
present and the future.”

So how does printing money affect prices? Well, the naive view is that
it doesn’t — the additional money gets used to buy more things which
hires more people — until everyone is hired. Then the money can’t go to
hire more people so it just goes to bid up the prices of things,
creating inflation. As I said, that’s the naive view — there are a
couple complications.

How does money influence demand? Primarily thru the rate of interest,
which depends on liquidity preferences, marginal efficiencies, and
investment multipliers. But these all depend on other complicating
factors.

Marginal prime costs and labor costs increase as industry is forced to
use more expensive equipment and laborers, resulting in higher prices.
Some industries hit “bottlenecks” first, causing their prices to rise
and demand to be funneled into industries that are faster to respond.
Then as some workers receive better wages other workers will demand it
and, since business is booming, receive it. Finally, with the additional
demand equipment and so on will have to be replaced, raising marginal
costs.

There’s an asymmetry in the system that workers will resist falling
wages, but not rising ones. But this is good, because otherwise wages
would fall to zero in any downturn and the entire economy would shut
down. But the side effect is that “the very long-run course of prices
has almost always been upward.”

Book VI: Short Notes Suggested by the General Theory
----------------------------------------------------

**22:** Why are there trade cycles, aka business cycles, aka booms and
busts?

Let’s start by thinking about the end of the boom. So business is
booming and everyone’s optimistic — even though costs of production (and
maybe interest rates) are rising, sales are too, so expected profits are
looking good. But since no one really knows what they’re doing,
especially not the speculators, it’s understandable that “when
disillusion falls upon an over-optimistic and over-bought market, it
should fall with sudden and even catastrophic force.” Everyone gets
freaked out that they’re not going to make money anymore and stops
investing and raises their liquidity preference, raising interest rates
and lowering investment further.

Because these things go together, they’re sometimes mistaken as the
cause, but note that it’s the expected return which falls first, then
interest rates rise. So even lowering interest rates isn’t enough to
recover from the crash. And “it is not so easy to revive the marginal
efficiency of capital, determined, as it is, by the uncontrollable and
disobedient psychology of the business world. It is the return of
confidence, to speak in ordinary language, which is so insusceptible to
control in an economy of individualistic capitalism. This is the aspect
of the slump which bankers and business men have been right in
emphasising, and which the economists who have put their faith in a
‘purely monetary’ remedy have underestimated.”

And there are other problems: when the stock market crashes, rich people
see themselves as less rich and decide to start spending less. (And when
everyone follows the stock market, like in the US, this applies to
everyone.) And the fact that people aren’t spending further decreases
expected returns.

So that’s the bust. What about recovery? Well, recovery can’t come until
old equipment is used up and has to be replaced and old stocks of goods
that were produced get sold off and have to be replenished. When
recovery picks up, it feeds on itself in the opposite way. But you can’t
jump-start it just by lowering interest rates, since the real problem is
expected return. Thus the government must step in.

Reading this, you might think the solution is to raise interest rates to
prevent overinvestment during booms, since lowering them doesn’t get you
out of slumps. But there’s two kinds of overinvestment: disappointing
investments, where the investment would have made sense except the
economy collapsed, and genuine overinvestment, where the investment
could never have made money. It’s only the second kind that’s an actual
waste of resources, and the solution to it isn’t raising interest rates
“which would probably deter some useful investments and might further
diminish the propensity to consume, but in taking drastic steps, by
redistributing incomes or otherwise, to stimulate the propensity to
consume.”

Why does redistributing income work? Think about the dot-com bubble
where everyone was blowing money on useless fiber-optic cable. If
venture capitalists are spending all their money on useless cable, the
solution is to take their money away. Instead, you can give it to poor
people, who will use it to buy useful things like food and clothing.

What happens isn’t so much excessive investment as misdirected
investment. Everyone builds houses thinking they’ll all sell for lots
and lots, then they find they aren’t actually selling for so much and
the economy collapses. “We reach a condition where there is a shortage
of houses, but where nevertheless no one can afford to live in the
houses that there are.”

> Thus the remedy for the boom is not a higher rate of interest but a
> lower rate of interest! For that may enable the so-called boom to
> last. The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in
> abolishing booms and thus keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but
> in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom.
> […]
>
> Except during the war, I doubt if we have any recent experience of a
> boom so strong that it led to full employment. … Nor was there
> over-investment in the sense that the standard and equipment of
> housing was so high that everyone, assuming full employment, had all
> he wanted at a rate which would no more than cover the replacement
> cost, without any allowance for interest, over the life of the house;
> and that transport, public services and agricultural improvement had
> been carried to a point where further additions could not reasonably
> be expected to yield even their replacement cost. Quite the contrary.
> It would be absurd to assert of the United States in 1929 the
> existence of over-investment in the strict sense.

In short, increasing interest rates to kill booms “belongs to the
species of remedy which cures the disease by killing the patient.”

What would the world of the permanent boom look like? It’s conceivable
that it might lead not just to full employment, but *full investment* —
a world with so much plenty that you couldn’t expect to make a profit on
any kind of durable good. “Moreover, this situation might be reached
comparatively soon—say within twenty-five years or less. I must not be
taken to deny this, because I assert that a state of full investment in
the strict sense has never yet occurred, not even momentarily.”

Others say the problem is that the country is so unequal that poor
people can’t spend enough. The solution, they propose, is redistributing
money to the poor to promote jobs. They are “undoubtedly in the right
[at present],” when investment is “unplanned and uncontrolled.” There’s
no other way to raise employment. If you can’t increase investment, you
have to increase consumption.

But we *could* increase investment: “the wisest course is to advance on
both fronts at once.” Not just so that the people we give money to can
buy the new products investment creates, but so that they have enough
money to buy even more, and thus spark growth themselves!

**23:** Now that Keynes has outlined his revolutionary theory, it’s time
to look back at other economists the classical school dismissed.

The classical school — including Keynes in earlier years — grew up
mocking mercantilism (protectionism) as incoherent and absurd. But maybe
it makes some sense: Growth depends on the inducements to new
investment. Investment is either foreign or domestic. Domestic
investment is encouraged by the interest rate and foreign investment by
the balance of trade. Thus, if you ignore direct investment by the
government (as people had), these are the two things to be concerned
about.

Now in general the interest rate is governed by the quantity of money
and “in an age in which substantial foreign loans and the outright
ownership of wealth located abroad are scarcely practicable” (not to
mention the international gold standard), money equals precious metals
which equals the balance of trade. (Since running a trade deficit with a
country means sending them your precious metals instead of your
exports.) Thus focusing on the balance of trade serves both purposes —
and, at a time we didn’t know how to control interest rates, was the
only direct means of controlling them.

Not all protectionism promotes the balance of trade, of course —
mid-1800s Britain probably would have done best with complete free
trade. But mercantilists saw the key points sooner than most, calling
for an increase in money to reduce the interest rate.

But the worst part of the international gold system is the way it sets
countries against one another. For a country could only keep its
citizens employed if it had gold, and the only way to get gold was by
taking it from another country (and thus throwing them out of work).
“Never in history was there a method devised of such efficacy for
setting each country’s advantage at variance with its neighbours’!”

> The mercantilists perceived the existence of the problem without being
> able to push their analysis to the point of solving it. But the
> classical school ignored the problem, as a consequence of introducing
> into their premisses conditions which involved its non-existence; with
> the result of creating a cleavage between the conclusions of economic
> theory and those of common sense. The extraordinary achievement of the
> classical theory was to overcome the beliefs of the ‘natural man’ and,
> at the same time, to be wrong.

Another thing the classical economists long mocked were laws against
usury. “I was brought up to believe that the attitude of the Medieval
Church to the rate of interest was inherently absurd, and that the
subtle discussions aimed at distinguishing the return on money-loans
from the return to active investment were merely Jesuitical attempts to
find a practical escape from a foolish theory. But I now read these
discussions as an honest intellectual effort to keep separate what the
classical theory has inextricably confused together, namely, the rate of
interest and the marginal efficiency of capital. For it now seems clear
that the disquisitions of the schoolmen were directed towards the
elucidation of a formula which should allow the schedule of the marginal
efficiency of capital to be high, whilst using rule and custom and the
moral law to keep down the rate of interest.” After all, “individual
savings may be absorbed either by investment or by debts, and that there
is no security that they will find an outlet in the former.” Laws
against usury help ensure they do.

> It is convenient to mention at this point the strange, unduly
> neglected prophet Silvio Gesell (1862-1930), whose work contains
> flashes of deep insight and who only just failed to reach down to the
> essence of the matter. In the post-war years his devotees bombarded me
> with copies of his works; yet, owing to certain palpable defects in
> the argument, I entirely failed to discover their merit. As is often
> the case with imperfectly analysed intuitions, their significance only
> became apparent after I had reached my own conclusions in my own way.
> Meanwhile, like other academic economists, I treated his profoundly
> original strivings as being no better than those of a crank. Since few
> of the readers of this book are likely to be well acquainted with the
> significance of Gesell, I will give to him what would be otherwise a
> disproportionate space.

Among Gesell’s proposals are the notion of stamped money (money you have
to pay to get stamped regularly to keep it valid currency) which is a
way of discouraging people from hoarding. “The idea behind stamped money
is sound. … But there are many difficulties which Gesell did not face.
In particular, he was unaware that money was not unique” — if people
didn’t hoard it, there’s lots of other things they could hoard.

Keynes also discusses Bernard Mandeville’s incredible book, *The Fable
of the Bees*. This incredible work of economic thought described the
division of labor and the invisible hand in 1705, a full seventy years
before Adam Smith. And, Keynes points out, it’s largely about the
paradox of thrift — centuries before Keynes! It’s basically been written
out of economic history, in part, no doubt, because it was written in
the form of a scandalous satirical epic poem. Indeed, it so scandalized
its readers at the time that it was “convicted as a nuisance by the
grand jury of Middlesex in 1723, which stands out in the history of the
moral sciences for its scandalous reputation.”

Finally we come to Major Douglas, who led the unorthodox Social Credit
movement in the UK:

> Major Douglas is entitled to claim, as against some of his orthodox
> adversaries, that he at least has not been wholly oblivious of the
> outstanding problem of our economic system. Yet he has scarcely
> established an equal claim to rank — a private, perhaps, but not a
> major in the brave army of heretics — with Mandeville, Malthus, Gesell
> and Hobson, who, following their intuitions, have preferred to see the
> truth obscurely and imperfectly rather than to maintain error, reached
> indeed with clearness and consistency and by easy logic, but on
> hypotheses inappropriate to the facts.

**24:** The two great economic problems are unemployment and inequality.
We have addressed the first, but what are its implications of the
second? Inequality has been addressed somewhat by government
redistribution, but some are hesitant to go further because they believe
that growth is promoted by savings and so taking away the savings of the
rich will retard growth. We have seen that it’s quite the opposite —
that redistribution, by increasing effective demand, *promotes* growth.
“One of the chief social justifications of great inequality of wealth
is, therefore, removed.”

That said, one wouldn’t want to get rid of money altogether:

> [D]angerous human proclivities can be canalised into comparatively
> harmless channels by the existence of opportunities for money-making
> and private wealth, which, if they cannot be satisfied in this way,
> may find their outlet in cruelty, the reckless pursuit of personal
> power and authority, and other forms of self-aggrandisement. It is
> better that a man should tyrannise over his bank balance than over his
> fellow-citizens; and whilst the former is sometimes denounced as being
> but a means to the latter, sometimes at least it is an alternative.

Let us imagine these policies are implemented. The government lowers
interest rates so that there’s full employment. Expected return would
then probably fall steadily keep it there, unless there’s an increase in
the propensity to consume (including by the State).

At this point, expected return might be just enough to cover the costs
of production, plus a little for risk and skill — just like other goods.

> Now, though this state of affairs would be quite compatible with some
> measure of individualism, yet it would mean the euthanasia of the
> rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative
> oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of
> capital. Interest today rewards no genuine sacrifice, any more than
> does the rent of land. The owner of capital can obtain interest
> because capital is scarce, just as the owner of land can obtain rent
> because land is scarce. But whilst there may be intrinsic reasons for
> the scarcity of land, there are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity
> of capital. An intrinsic reason for such scarcity, in the sense of a
> genuine sacrifice which could only be called forth by the offer of a
> reward in the shape of interest, would not exist, in the long run,
> except in the event of the individual propensity to consume proving to
> be of such a character that net saving in conditions of full
> employment comes to an end before capital has become sufficiently
> abundant. But even so, it will still be possible for communal saving
> through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level which will
> allow the growth of capital up to the point where it ceases to be
> scarce.
>
> I see, therefore, the rentier aspect of capitalism as a transitional
> phase which will disappear when it has done its work. And with the
> disappearance of its rentier aspect much else in it besides will
> suffer a sea-change. It will be, moreover, a great advantage of the
> order of events which I am advocating, that the euthanasia of the
> rentier, of the functionless investor, will be nothing sudden, merely
> a gradual but prolonged continuance of what we have seen recently in
> Great Britain, and will need no revolution.
>
> Thus we might aim in practice (there being nothing in this which is
> unattainable) at an increase in the volume of capital until it ceases
> to be scarce, so that the functionless investor will no longer receive
> a bonus; and at a scheme of direct taxation which allows the
> intelligence and determination and executive skill of the financier,
> the entrepreneur *et hoc genus omen* (who are certainly so fond of
> their craft that their labour could be obtained much cheaper than at
> present), to be harnessed to the service of the community on
> reasonable terms of reward.
>
> At the same time we must recognise that only experience can show how
> far the common will, embodied in the policy of the State, ought to be
> directed to increasing and supplementing the inducement to invest; and
> how far it is safe to stimulate the average propensity to consume,
> without foregoing our aim of depriving capital of its scarcity-value
> within one or two generations. It may turn out that the propensity to
> consume will be so easily strengthened by the effects of a falling
> rate of interest, that full employment can be reached with a rate of
> accumulation little greater than at present. In this event a scheme
> for the higher taxation of large incomes and inheritances might be
> open to the objection that it would lead to full employment with a
> rate of accumulation which was reduced considerably below the current
> level. I must not be supposed to deny the possibility, or even the
> probability, of this outcome. For in such matters it is rash to
> predict how the average man will react to a changed environment. If,
> however, it should prove easy to secure an approximation to full
> employment with a rate of accumulation not much greater than at
> present, an outstanding problem will at least have been solved. And it
> would remain for separate decision on what scale and by what means it
> is right and reasonable to call on the living generation to restrict
> their consumption, so as to establish in course of time, a state of
> full investment for their successors.

Now the State will still have to guide things; it seems unlikely that
just controlling interest rates will be enough to ensure this utopian
state of affairs. Instead, it might turn out “a somewhat comprehensive
socialisation of investment will prove the only means of securing an
approximation to full employment; though this need not exclude all
manner of compromises and of devices by which public authority will
co-operate with private initiative.” Still, this is a comparatively
conservative claim:

> But beyond this no obvious case is made out for a system of State
> Socialism which would embrace most of the economic life of the
> community. It is not the ownership of the instruments of production
> which it is important for the State to assume. If the State is able to
> determine the aggregate amount of resources devoted to augmenting the
> instruments and the basic rate of reward to those who own them, it
> will have accomplished all that is necessary. Moreover, the necessary
> measures of socialisation can be introduced gradually and without a
> break in the general traditions of society. […]
>
> Whilst, therefore, the enlargement of the functions of government,
> involved in the task of adjusting to one another the propensity to
> consume and the inducement to invest, would seem to a
> nineteenth-century publicist or to a contemporary American financier
> to be a terrific encroachment on individualism, I defend it, on the
> contrary, both as the only practicable means of avoiding the
> destruction of existing economic forms in their entirety and as the
> condition of the successful functioning of individual initiative.
>
> For if effective demand is deficient, not only is the public scandal
> of wasted resources intolerable, but the individual enterpriser who
> seeks to bring these resources into action is operating with the odds
> loaded against him. The game of hazard which he plays is furnished
> with many zeros, so that the players as a whole will lose if they have
> the energy and hope to deal all the cards. Hitherto the increment of
> the world’s wealth has fallen short of the aggregate of positive
> individual savings; and the difference has been made up by the losses
> of those whose courage and initiative have not been supplemented by
> exceptional skill or unusual good fortune. But if effective demand is
> adequate, average skill and average good fortune will be enough.

And, if our theory does work and we end up with full employment, then we
return to the world of the classical economic theory, whose only flaw
was assuming that full employment was the only possible state of
affairs. “It is in determining the volume, not the direction, of actual
employment that the existing system has broken down.”

> Is the fulfilment of these ideas a visionary hope? Have they
> insufficient roots in the motives which govern the evolution of
> political society? Are the interests which they will thwart stronger
> and more obvious than those which they will serve?
>
> I do not attempt an answer in this place. It would need a volume of a
> different character from this one to indicate even in outline the
> practical measures in which they might be gradually clothed. But if
> the ideas are correct — an hypothesis on which the author himself must
> necessarily base what he writes — it would be a mistake, I predict, to
> dispute their potency over a period of time. At the present moment
> people are unusually expectant of a more fundamental diagnosis; more
> particularly ready to receive it; eager to try it out, if it should be
> even plausible. But apart from this contemporary mood, the ideas of
> economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and
> when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood.
> Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who believe
> themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are
> usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who
> hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic
> scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power of vested
> interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment
> of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a certain interval; for
> in the field of economic and political philosophy there are not many
> who are influenced by new theories after they are twenty-five or
> thirty years of age, so that the ideas which civil servants and
> politicians and even agitators apply to current events are not likely
> to be the newest. But, soon or late, it is ideas, not vested
> interests, which are dangerous for good or evil.


Redesign
========

September 23, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/redesign)

* * * * *

I was going through my weblog archives the other day and found an early
post I’d written *nine years ago* (in yet another piece of blogging
software I’d written myself…). But what was even more shocking than the
notion that I’d been blogging for over a decade was that my web design
back then was better than it was today.

This really kept nagging at me, so I took a couple hours tonight to do a
redesign. I still have very little in the way of [positive artistic
talent](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2taste), so it’s nothing
impressive, but I do hope that it will keep me from recoiling in horror
from my own weblog. My apologies to everyone I borrowed design features
from.

Feel free to use this thread to comment on the redesign.


Keynes, Explained Briefly
=========================

September 24, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/keynes)

* * * * *

If you read the economic textbooks, you’ll find that the job market is a
market like any other. There’s supply (workers) and demand (employers).
And the incredible power of market competition pushes the price (wages)
to where those two meet. Thus massive unemployment is about as likely as
huge unsold piles of wheat: if people aren’t buying, it’s just because
you’re setting the price too high.

And yet, as I write, 17.5% of the country is unemployed. Are they all
just insisting on being paid too much? Economists are forced into the
most ridiculous explanations. Perhaps people just don’t know where the
jobs are, some say. (Maybe the government should run ads for
Craigslist.) Or maybe it just takes time for all those former
house-builders to learn new jobs. (This despite the fact that
unemployment is up in all industries.) But they’re typically forced back
to the fundamental conclusion of the textbook: that people are just
demanding to be paid too much. It might be for the most innocent of
reasons, but facts are facts.

John Maynard Keynes’ great insight was to see that all of this was
nonsense. The job market is a very special market, because the people
who get “bought” are also the people doing all the buying. After all,
why is it that people are hired to farm wheat? It’s because, at the end
of the day, other people want to buy it. But if lots of people are out
of a job, they’re doing their best to save money, which means cutting
back on purchases. And if they cut back on purchases, that means there
are fewer people for business to sell to, which means businesses cut
back on jobs.

Clearly something is badly wrong with the basic economic theory. So
let’s go through [Keynes’ masterpiece, *The General Theory of
Employment, Interest, and
Money*](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/generaltheory), and understand his
theory of how the economy works.

* * * * *

When you get your paycheck at the end of the week, you spend it. But
presumably you don’t spend all of it — you put some money away to save,
like you were told as a child. Saving is seen as a great national virtue
— thus all those Public Service Announcements with talking piggy banks.
Everyone knows why: put some money away today and it’ll be worth more
tomorrow.

But there’s a kind of illusion involved in this. Money isn’t worth
anything on its own, it’s only useful because it can buy things. And it
buys things because it pays other people to make them for you. But you
can’t save *people* in your bank account — if fifteen million people are
out of work, they can’t put their time in a piggy bank for when things
are looking up. The work they could have done is lost forever.

So yes, some people can save while others borrow from them — you can let
your neighbor buy two iPods in exchange for letting you buy four next
year — but the country, as a whole, cannot. At the end of the day,
someone has to buy the things we can make. But if everyone’s saving,
that means people aren’t buying. Which means the people making stuff are
out of a job.

It’s a vicious cycle: if people buy less, companies make less, which
means people get paid less, which means people buy less. And so on,
until we’re all out of work. (Thankfully it doesn’t get that bad — but
only because some people are refusing to lower their wages. The thing
that mainstream economists said was causing unemployment is actually
preventing it!)

But this cycle can be run in reverse. Imagine Donald Trump hires
unemployed people to build him a new skyscraper. They’re suddenly
getting paid again, which means they can start spending again. And each
dollar they spend goes to a different business, which can start hiring
people itself. And then *those* newly-hired people start spending the
new money *they* make, and so on. This is the *multiplier*: each dollar
that gets spent provides even more than one dollar’s worth of boost to
the economy.

* * * * *

Now let’s look at things from the employer’s side — say you run an truck
factory. How do you decide how many trucks to make? Obviously, you make
as many as you think you can profitably sell. But there’s no way to
calculate something like that — it’s a question about what customers
will do in the future. There’s literally no way to know. And yet,
obviously, trucks get made.

It used to be, Keynes says, that wealthy men just thought investing was
the manly thing to do. They weren’t going to sit around and calculate
what kind of bonds yielded the greatest expected return. Bonds are for
wusses. They were real men. They were going to take their money and
build a railroad.

But they don’t make rich people like that anymore. Nowadays, they put
their money in the stock market. Instead of boldly picking one great
enterprise to invest in, they shift their money around from week to week
(or hire someone else to do it for them). So these days, it’s the stock
market that stimulates most new investment.

But how does the stock market figure out what profits are supposed to
be? In truth, it has no more clue than you do. It’s really just based
around a convention. We all pretend that whatever the stock price is now
is a pretty decent guess and then we only have to worry about the
various factors that will cause the stock price to change. We forget
about the most basic fact: that nobody has any clue what the stock price
should be to begin with.

So instead of people trying their best to figure out which businesses
will make money in the future, and investing in those, we have people
who try to figure out which stock prices will change in the future, and
trying to get there first. It’s like a giant game of musical chairs —
everybody’s rushing not to be the one left standing when the music
stops.

Or, you could say, it’s like those newspaper competitions where you have
to pick the six prettiest faces from a hundred photographs. The prize
goes to the person who picks the faces that are most picked, so you
don’t pick the faces *you* find prettiest, but instead the faces you
think *everyone else* will find prettiest. But it’s not even that, since
everyone else is doing the same thing — you’re actually picking the
faces you think everyone else will think everyone else will find
prettiest! And no doubt there are some people who take this even
further.

You might think this means that someone who actually did the work and
tried to calculate expected profits would clean up, taking money from
all the people playing musical chairs. But it’s not so simple.
Calculating expected profits is really quite hard. To make money, you’d
have to be unusually good at it, and it seems much easier to just guess
what everyone else will do.

And even if you were somehow good at guessing long-term profits, where
would you get the money to invest? It’s in the fundamental nature of
your strategy that your investments seem crazy to everyone else. If
you’re successful, they’ll write it off as a lucky fluke. And when your
stocks aren’t doing well (which is most of the time — they’re long-term
picks, remember), people will take this as evidence of your failures and
pull their money out.

The scary thing is that the more open our markets get, the faster people
can move their money around and the more trading is based on this kind
of speculation instead of serious analysis. And that’s scary because —
recall — the whole point of the stock market is to decide the crucial
question of what we, as a society, should build for the future. As
Keynes says, “When the capital development of a country becomes a
by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be
ill-done.”

The best solution is probably a small tax on each trade. Not only would
this raise a ton of money (modern estimates suggest even a tiny tax
could raise \$100 billion a year), it would help redirect all the brains
on Wall Street from these wasteful games of musical chairs to something
actually useful.

But even if we solve the problem of the stock market, there’s still some
irreducible uncertainty. Because whether new investment makes sense
always depends on whether the economy will be doing well in the future.
And whether the economy is doing well depends on whether there’s new
investment. So, at the end of the day, investment doesn’t depend simply
on a careful calculation of future expected yield, but on our “animal
spirits,” our optimism about the future. It’s this factor that
exaggerates booms and deepens slumps and makes it hard to get out of a
bad situation.

Even more perversely, it means economic performance depends in no small
part on keeping businessmen happy. If electing Obama gets businessmen
depressed, they might pull back their investments and send the economy
into a slump. It doesn’t even have to be intentional — they may very
well believe that a President Obama is bad for the economy. But when you
have a system that only works when businesspeople feel good, their fears
become a self-fulfilling prophecy.

The result, Keynes suggests, is that the government will have to step in
to prevent the economy from crashing every time rich people get a bit of
indigestion.

* * * * *

So that’s how we calculate the income side of things, now what about
costs? Most costs are pretty clear — you need to buy equipment and hire
people. But since you need to make stuff now that you can only sell in
the future, one of your big costs is going to be money to use in the
meantime. And the cost of money is just the interest rate. (If you get a
loan for a million dollars at 5% interest, you’re essentially paying
\$50,000 for the right to use the money now.)

Thus lowering interest rates increases investment — it reduces the cost
of getting money, which reduces the cost of making stuff, which means
more things can make a profit. And if more things can make a profit,
more things get made, which means more people get hired. So what
determines the interest rate?

Well, if the interest rate is the cost of money, the obvious answer is
the amount of money in circulation. If there’s a lot of money lying
around, you can get some pretty cheap. Which means that, fundamentally,
unemployment is caused by a lack of money: more money (assuming people
don’t hoard it all) means lower interest rates, lower interest rates
(assuming expected profits don’t crash) means higher investment, higher
investment (assuming people don’t stop buying) means more employment,
and more employment means higher prices, which means we’re going to need
more money.

Money is created by the central bank (the Federal Reserve in the US),
which decides what they want the interest rate to be and then prints new
money (which they use to buy up government debt) until the interest rate
is where they want. To get the economy back on track, all they have to
do is keep lowering interest rates until investment picks up again and
everyone has a job.

But there’s one catch: the interest rate can’t go below zero. (Keynes
didn’t think this problem was very likely, but in the US we’re facing it
right now.) What do you do if the interest rate is zero and people are
still out of work?

Well, you can pray that billionaires will start hiring us all to build
them giant mansions, but that’s no way to run a country. The government
has to step in. Instead of waiting for billionaires to build
pleasure-domes, the government can hire people to build things we all
need — roads, schools, houses, high-speed Internet connections.
Although, honesty, it doesn’t have to be things we all need. They could
hire people to do anything. This is why inspecting the stimulus money
for waste is so ridiculous — waste is perfectly fine, the important
thing is to get the money into circulation so that the economy can get
back on track.

Another good solution is redistributing income. Poor people are a lot
more likely to spend money than billionaires. If we take some money from
the billionaires and give it to the poor, the poor will use it to buy
things they need and people will get jobs making those things.

Remember that money is just a kind of illusion. In reality, there are
just people who want things and people who make things. But we’re stuck
in a completely ridiculous situation: there are lots of people who
desperately want jobs making things — they’re literally not doing
anything else — while at the same time there are lots of people who
desperately want things made. It seems ridiculous not to do something
about this just because some people have all the little green sheets of
paper!

Capitalism seems to go through frustrating cycles of booms and busts.
Some people say the solution is just to prevent the booms — raise
interest rates so the party doesn’t get out of hand and we won’t all be
sorry the next morning. Keynes disagrees: the remedy “is not to be found
in abolishing booms and thus keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but
in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom.”

Think back to the dot-com era, when venture capitalists were spending
all their money laying fiber-optic cable under the street. The right
solution wasn’t for the Fed to raise interest rates until even
punch-drunk venture capitalists could realize all this investment in
fiber wouldn’t be profitable. The right solution was to *take their
money away*. Give it to the poor, who will spend it on something useful,
like food and clothing.

So those are Keynes’ prescriptions for a successful economy: low
interest rates, government investment, and redistribution to the poor.
And, for a time — from around the 1940s to the 1970s — that’s kind of
what we did. The results were magical: the economy grew strongly,
inequality fell away, everyone had jobs.

But, starting in the 1970s, the rich staged a counterattack. They didn’t
like watching inequality — and their wealth — melt away. There was a
resurgence in classical economics, Keynes was declared to have been
debunked, and interest rates were raised drastically, throwing millions
out of work. The economy tanked, inequality soared, and things have
never been the same since. For a while people talked about levels of
inequality that hadn’t been seen since the 1920s. Then they talked about
a recession the size of which hadn’t been seen since the 1930s.

Once again, Keynes provides us with the instructions on how to get out
of this mess. The question is whether we’ll follow them.


Wanted by the FBI
=================

October 5, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fbifile)

* * * * *

I got my FBI file today. ([Request
yours!](http://foia.fbi.gov/privacy_instruc.htm)) As I hoped, it’s truly
delightful. It has only minor redactions for reasons of personal privacy
(basically, they deleted agents’ names and so on). It all started when
the—actually, I’ll let the file tell the story:

February 6, from Washington Field to Chicago:

> UNCLASSIFIED
>
> FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATIoN
>
> **Precedence:** ROUTINE
>
> **Case ID \#:** 288A-WF-238343 (Pending)
>
> **Title:** UNSUB(s); US COURTS - VICTIM; COMPUTER INTRUSION - OTHER
>
> **Synopsis:** To set lead to locate Aaron Swartz.
>
> **Enclosure(s):** Attached is an Accurint Report for Swartz.
>
> **Details:** The U.S. Courts implemented a pilot project offering free
> access to federal court records through the PACER system at seventeen
> federal depository libraries. Library personnel maintain login and
> password security and provide access to users from computers within
> the library. PACER normally carries an eight cents per page fee,
> however, by accessing from one of the seventeen libraries, users may
> search and download data for free.
>
> Between September 4, 2008 and September 22, 2008, PACER was accessed
> by computers from outside the library utilizing login information from
> two libraries participating in the pilot project. The Administrative
> Office of the U.S. Courts reported that the PACER system was being
> inundated with requests. One request was being made every three
> seconds.
>
> […] The two accounts were responsible for downloading more than
> eighteen million pages with an approximate value of \$1.5 million.
>
> […] Data that was exfiltrated went to one of two Amazon IP addresses.
>
> Investigation has determined that the Amazon IP address used to access
> the PACER system belongs to Aaron Swartz.
>
> The following information was provided for the IP address:
>
> > Name: Aaron Swartz\
> >  Address: 349 Marshman Avenue, Highland Park, IL 60035\
> >  Telephone: 847-432-8857
>
> A search in Accurint and Swartz’s personal webpage confirmed this
> information. Swartz’s social security account number is […]. The
> telephone subscriber for telephone number [REDACTED] is [REDACTED].
>
> NCIS report for Aaron Swartz was negative. A search for wages for
> Swartz at the Department of Labor was negative.
>
> […]
>
> Washington Field Office requests that the North RA attempt to locate
> AARON SWARTZ, his vehicles, drivers license information and picture,
> and others, at 349 Marshman Avenue, Highland Park, IL 60035. Since
> SWARTZ is the potential subject of an ongoing investigation, it is
> requested that SWARTZ not be approached by agents.

February 15, Manassas, VA:

> **Set Lead 1: (Info)**
>
> […]
>
> AARON SWARTZ has a profile on the website LINKEDIN, at
> www.linkedin.com/in/aaronsw. SWARTZ is listed as a writer, hacker and
> activist based in the San Francisco Bay Area. SWARTZ’s education
> includes Stanford University, Sociology, 2004. SWARTZ’s experience
> includes the following:
>
> […]
>
> SWARTZ has a profile on the website FACEBOOK. His networks include
> Stanford ‘08 and Boston, MA. The picture used in his profile was also
> used in an article about SWARTZ in THE NEW YORK TIMES.
>
> SWARTZ’s personal webpage, www.aaronsw.com, includes a section titled
> “Aaron Swartz: a life time of dubious accomplishments”. In 2007,
> SWARTZ began working full-time as a member of the Long-Term Planning
> Committee for the Human Race (LTPCHR).

February 19, Manassas, VA:

> On February 17, 2008 [*sic*], SA [REDACTED] received an email from
> [REACTED] Administrative Office of the US Courts, with links to two
> published articles regarding the compromise of the PACER system.
>
> On February 12, 2009, [REACTED] published an article in THE NEW YORK
> TIMES titled “An Effort to Upgrade a Court Archive to Free and Easy”.
> For the article, [REDACTED] interviewed [REDACTED] and AARON SWARTZ
> regarding the compromise of the PACER system.
>
> The following information is found in the article: […]

February 24, Chicago:

> **Synopsis:** Lead covered by Chicago North RA
>
> **Enclosure(s):** Illinois DL/ID Image of Swartz and Accurint
> Vehicle/Residence Reports for Swartz address.
>
> **Details:** Attempted to locate AARON SWARTZ, his vehicles, drivers
> license information and picture, and others at 349 Marshman Avenue,
> Highland Park, IL 60035.
>
> Successfully located drivers license photo for SWARTZ. Drove by
> address in an attempt to locate SWARTZ or vehicles related to the
> residence, but was unsuccessful. House is set on a deep lot, behind
> other houses on Marshman Avenue. This is a heavily wooded, dead-end
> street, with no other cars parked on the road making continued
> surveillance difficult to conduct without severely increasing the risk
> of discovery. However, divers license and Accurint information lists
> address above. Other family members are listed as current residents
> and four vehicles are currently registered to Susan Swartz who resides
> at above address. Illinois database checks for SWARTZ yielded negative
> results. SWARTZ has no arrests, no registered vehicles or property.
>
> Chicago considers this lead covered.

March 9, Manassas, VA:

> AARON SWARTZ posted a weblog titled “NYT Personals” [on February 13
> —AS] at http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog. In the weblog, SWARTZ quotes
> the NEW YORK TIMES article in which he was interviewed. SWARTZ also
> posts “Want to meet the man behind the headlines? Want to have the
> F.B.I. open up a file on you as well? Interested in some kind of
> bizarre celebrity product endorsement? I’m available in Boston and New
> York all this month”.

March 23, Manassas, VA:

> On March 10, 2009, [REDACTED] of THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE US
> COURTS (US COURTS) provided the following information:
>
> […] When asked to clarify how a user knows what constitutes
> unauthorized access and how a user would have known that they had to
> be in one of the seventeen libraries to access PACER, [REDACTED] had
> [REDACTED] prepare a response.
>
> [REDACTED] provided the following information:
>
> AARON SWARTZ would have known his access was unauthorized because it
> was with a password that did not belonged to him.

April 14, Manassas, VA

> On 04/14/2009, SA [REDACTED] called (847) 432-8857 in an attempt to
> speak to AARON SWARTZ. A female answered the telephone and stated that
> SWARTZ was not available […] SA [REDACTED] left a message for SWARTZ
> to return her call and the female stated that she would email that
> message to SWARTZ.
>
> SWARTZ called SA [REDACTED] and left a message on her voicemail
> stating he could be reached at […]. This number is a T-Mobile cellular
> number and returned negative results in Telephone Applications.
>
> SA [REACTED] spoke to SWARTZ, at telephone number […], and explained
> that the FBI is looking for information on how SWARTZ was able to
> compromise the PACER system so that the US COURTS could implement
> repairs to the system and get PACER running again. SWARTZ stated that
> he would have to talk to his attorney first and would call SA
> [REDACTED] back at a later time.

April 16, Manassas, VA:

> On 04/16/2009, SA [REDACTED] returned a telephone call to ANDREW GOOD,
> (617) […]. GOOD is AARON SWARTZ’s attorney in Boston, MA. GOOD wanted
> assurance that if SWARTZ was interviewed, what he said would not be
> used to jeopardize him. SA [REDACTED] explained that assurance could
> not be given but that we were in an information gathering phase. GOOD
> refused the interview without the assurance.

April 20, Washington Field Office:

> **CASE ID \#:** 288A-WF-238943 (Closed)
>
> […]
>
> CCIPS Attorney [REDACTED] closed the office’s case. Based on the CCIPS
> closing, Washington Field is closing this case as of this
> communication.

I’ve just sent away for the CCIPS file.


djb
===

October 19, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/djb)

* * * * *

[日本語](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/djb.ja)

I think it’s time to remind people that D. J. Bernstein is the greatest
programmer in the history of the world.

First, look only at the objective facts. djb has written two major
pieces of system software: a mail server and a DNS server. Both are run
by millions of Internet domains. They accomplish all sorts of
complicated functions, work under incredibly high loads, and confront no
end of unusual situations. And they both run pretty much exactly has
Bernstein first wrote them. One bug — one bug! — was found in qmail. A
second bug was recently found in djbdns, but you can get a sense of how
important it is by the fact that it took people nearly a decade to find
it.

No other programmer has this kind of track record. Donald Knuth probably
comes closest, but his diary about writing TeX (printed in *[Literate
Programming](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0937073806)*) shows how he kept
finding bugs for years and never expected to be finished, only to get
closer and closer (thus the odd version numbering scheme). Not only does
no one else have djb’s track record, no one else even comes close.

But far more important are the subjective factors. djb’s programs are
some of the greatest works of beauty to be comprehended by the human
mind. As with great art, the outline of the code is somehow visually
pleasing — there is balance and rhythm and meter that rivals even the
best typography. As with great poetry, every character counts — every
single one is there because it needs to be. But these programs are not
just for being seen or read — like a graceful dancer, they move! And not
just as a single dancer either, but a whole choreographed number —
processes splitting and moving and recombining at great speeds, around
and around again.

But, unlike a dance, this movement has a purpose. They accomplish things
that need accomplishing — they find your websites, they ferry your email
from place to place. In the most fantastic movies, the routing and
sorting of the post office is imagined as a giant endless choreographed
dance number. (Imagine, perhaps, “The Office” from *Brazil*.) But this
is no one-time fantasy, this is how your email gets sorted *every day*.

And the dance is not just there to please human eyes — it is a dance
with a purpose. Each of its inner mechanisms is perfectly crafted, using
the fewest number of moving parts, accomplishing its task with the most
minimal energy. The way jobs are divided and assigned is nothing short
of brilliant. The brilliance is not merely linguistic, although it is
that too, but contains a kind of elegant mathematical effectiveness,
backed by a stream of numbers and equations that show, through pure
reason alone, that the movements are provably perfect, a better solution
is guaranteed not to exist.

But even all this does not capture his software’s incredible beauty. For
djb’s programs are not great machines to be admired from a distance,
vast powerhouses of elegant accomplishment. They are also tools meant to
be used by man, perfectly fitted to one’s hand. Like a great piece of
industrial design, they bring joy to the user every time they are used.

What other field combines all these arts? Language, math, art, design,
function. Programming is clearly in a class of its own. And, when it
comes to programmers, who even competes with djb? Who else has worked to
realize these amazing possibilities? Who else even knows they are there?

Oddly, there are many people who profess to hate djb. Some of this is
just the general distaste of genius: djb clearly has a forceful,
uncompromising vision, which many misinterpret as arrogance and
rudeness. And some of it is the practical man’s disregard for great
design: djb’s programs do not work like most programs, for the simple
reason that the way most programs work is wrong. But the animosity goes
much deeper than that. I do not profess to understand it, but I do
honestly suspect at some level it’s people without taste angry and
frustrated at the plaudits showered on what they cannot see. Great art
always generates its share of mocking detractors.

This is not to say that djb’s work is perfect. There are the bugs, as
mentioned before, and the log files, which are nothing if not inelegant,
and no doubt djb would make numerous changes were he to write the
software again today. But who else is even trying? Who else even knows
this is possible? I did not realize what great art in software could be
until I read djb. And now I feel dirty reading anything else.

*More:* You may also be interested in [what djb is doing
now](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001502).


Subjectivism
============

October 19, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/subjectivism)

* * * * *

I have two friends — let’s call them Q and R — whose political
philosophy I find alien and fascinating. Like me, they genuinely want to
help the poor but, like conservatives, they object to most typical
solutions for doing so. (And yes, I know conservatives claim they want
to help the poor, but it usually turns out that there are other things
they think are more important. Not so with Q and R.)

Q thinks the most important thing is how it *feels* to be poor. The
problem isn’t so much that they don’t have money, but that they’re made
to feel bad because of it. Welfare is thus a bad idea because it just
makes the poor feel worse — not only can they not make money, but they
have to come hat-in-hand to the government for help. My first reaction
to this was that the poor were wrong: it wasn’t their fault they were
poor, they were just the losers in a rigged game. But, of course, they
don’t know the game is rigged and things they don’t know can’t make them
feel better. By focusing on the objective facts, Q argues, we’re
ignoring the actual lived experiences of the poor.

Q is thus upset by socialist writers, like Orwell (*Down and Out in
Paris and London*, *The Road to Wigan Pier*) and Ehrenreich (*Nickel and
Dimed*, *Bait and Switch*), who attempt to get the reader to imagine
what it would be like if they were poor. Because this is just another
way of getting the reader to focus on the objective situation. In all
probability, the reader will *not* be poor ands thus the question of
what it would be like is irrelevant; what’s important is what it would
be like for the actual poor and that requires talking to them.

R also objects to welfare policies, but on rather different grounds. R
starts from the premise that people are bad at making themselves happy.
Well-to-do professionals, who seem so much better off than the poor, may
not actually be doing that much better. To continue to live in the style
to which they’ve become accustomed, they must work long hours at a job
they dislike. Because of the endowment effect, getting off this
treadmill would cause them even more pain. A few lucky people earn money
at tasks they find fulfilling, but perhaps not many more than are happy
being poor.

Welfare — or, indeed, any proposal to improve the objective situation of
the poor — is a bad idea in R’s view because it simply makes it harder
for them to get off the treadmill. One might think the right response to
this is what we might call (with apologies to Thaler) a kind of
utilitarian paternalism, where the government steps in and shows people
how to be happy. But why would the government know how to be happy?
Having a satisfied life is a cultural problem, R argues, and the
solution lies in non-governmental steps to reform culture.

I find these arguments interesting because they start from rather
inarguable premises (what matters is how it feels to be poor, people
don’t know the best way to make themselves happy) to draw very
frustrating conclusions.

Take Q. Corporate profits (and thus employee pay) depend on how much of
a monopoly the company has. Even the secretary at Google is a
millionaire, while even the owner of a farm is desperately poor. There’s
no way to make a company in a competitive market pay more because there
just isn’t more money to pay. But getting rid of competitive markets
seems like a bad idea; competition has clearly made our lives better.
But if we want to make things better for those who aren’t paid well (and
let’s just say we do, since that’s kind of the basic premise of this
whole article), that just leaves transferring money from those who have
it to those who don’t. Which, according to Q, doesn’t make anyone feel
better.

Other countries seem to deal with this by designing the money so that
money isn’t transferred directly, but is spent on universally available
public services. It’s not that the French poor get given money they can
spend on health care, it’s that in France health care is free to
everyone. Poor people don’t feel singled out and aided—everyone uses
government health care. (And the wealthy are much less likely to vote
against programs they themselves use.)

This also goes some way to addressing R’s objection: people aren’t being
given more money to spend how they see fit, they’re being given access
to services we expect to make them happy. And the access doesn’t ever go
away, so it doesn’t contribute to the endowment effect.

Even so, R would argue, much of these universal services are things like
education which make it so that a broader group of people can sign up to
work at rat race jobs and thus get on the unhappy treadmill. Why support
policies that bring more people into this unhappy system? (R also
happens to think schooling is bad on its own terms, as is health care,
but I don’t think that’s necessary for the argument.)

But a tax for service system compresses the whole wage structure. The
wealthy earn less money, because they pay some of it in taxes, and thus
don’t have as far to fall. And the poor get more services, which means
that even if the wealthy do lose their job and fall, they don’t fall as
far, since the floor has been raised. All of this would seem to make it
easier to quit a job you don’t like. (Egads, I’m mixing metaphors like
Thomas Friedman. Falling off a treadmill to services on a higher floor?)
Indeed, in the extreme case, services would be so high you wouldn’t have
to work at all unless you wanted to. (Whether this extreme is
economically feasible is a separate discussion.)

So that’s what I’m for: democracy within organizations, transfers
between organizations, and structuring the rules of the market to
maximize social benefit. Oh, and [euthanasia of the
rentier](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/generaltheory).


Because We Can
==============

October 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/becausewecan2)

* * * * *

When I first started studying the First Amendment — nearly a decade ago;
yikes, this is a very overdue blog post — I read about the different
theories trying to make sense of it. Some scholars argued the First
Amendment’s goal was to create a robust marketplace of ideas: if
everyone could share their opinion, the truth could come out through
robust debate. Others concluded the First Amendment was a sort of
logical safeguard: by protecting speech and assembly and petitions for
redress of grievances, it guaranteed people the right to work against
laws they disapprove of, kind of the way the Second Amendment is said to
be a bulwark against totalitarianism.

These aren’t just theoretical debates; the theories have practical
consequences for how one interprets that key amendment. If you believe
it’s for a marketplace of ideas, then you will support regulation aimed
at correcting market failures by suppressing certain kinds of
problematic speech. If you believe it’s a political safeguard, then you
will not be too worried about speech regulation aimed at clearly
nonpolitical speech.

Now, I’m not quite sure why such a theory is needed. The First Amendment
always struck me as perfectly clear: “Congress shall make no law.” No
law meant no law (at least with regard to content; I’m more lenient when
it comes to regulating other aspects). But if one has to have a theory,
it struck me the right one was something completely different: Because
We Can.

The Framers were very skeptical of government. The system they designed
was full of checks and fetters, of which the First Amendment is probably
the most extreme (unless you believe in a libertarian conception of the
Tenth). They saw government as a necessary evil; they were willing to
accept it, but they wanted to constrain it where they could.

And speech is a very obvious way to constrain it. A government needs to
be able to stop violence and make war and so on or its people will get
very badly hurt. But there’s no reason it has to stop speech. As the old
saying goes, sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never
hurt me. Words do hurt, of course, but theirs is a tolerable pain.
People, and society, march on even in the face of grievous insults. And
so the Framers decided to exclude this class of regulation from the
government’s ambit. Not because speech is particularly good, but because
it’s not particularly bad. Because it’s one thing they could safely
exclude. Because we can.

The implications of this theory for interpretation are obvious: they
lead to the most expansive conception of the First Amendment compatible
with the other goals of government: a stable democratic body to promote
the general welfare, and so on. That’s certainly further than any court
heretofore has gone and probably a bit further than I’d personally
prefer, but isn’t that what fetters are for?


Disciplinary Bubbles
====================

October 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/disciplinarybubbles)

* * * * *

*Here’s another blog post that’s long overdue. There seems to be a surge
of interest in the topic lately, so I thought I’d write up my
longstanding thoughts.*

The academy is often thought of as the ideal for developing knowledge:
select the brightest minds in the country, guarantee them jobs, allow
them all the resources they need to research anything, don’t interfere
with any of their conclusions. On some issues, these independent-minded
academics form a consensus and we tend to give their consensus very
heavy weight. They can’t all be wrong, can they?

And yet, in my empirical research, I find they very often are. A short
blog post is no place to do a careful study, but I can mention some
examples. The classic works in industrial relations turn out to be
complete hoaxes, yet they’ve dominated the teach of the field for over
half a century. (See [Alex Carey’s
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/086840358X) for details.) In political
science, the most respected practioner’s most famous work shades and
distorts his own findings to support a theory wildly at odds with the
facts. (See [*Who Really
Rules?*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whoreallyrules)) The whole field
of fMRI studies are so flat-out ridiculous that journal articles are
even [making jokes about
them](http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2009/09/dead-salmon-responds-to-portra.html).
And, maybe most blatantly today, economics was dominated by a paradigm
that believed substantive unemployment was impossible, despite that
notion having been famously and thoroughly debunked by Keynes and, of
course, reality.

How is this possible? I think the key, as in most institutional studies,
is that of the filter. To become a professor of X, one must first spend
several years receiving an undergraduate major in X, then several more
years going to graduate school in X, then perhaps work as a postdoc or
adjunct for a bit, before getting a tenure-track position and working
like mad to make enough of a dent in the field of X to be seen as
deserving of a prominent permanent position. When your time is called, a
panel of existing professors of X passes judgment on your work to decide
if it passes muster. Can you imagine a better procedure for forcing
impressionable young minds to believe crazy things?

And so this process forms what I call disciplinary bubbles. Take the
case of industrial relations for a moment. The field was largely created
by the Rockefellers, who wanted research into how they could get rid of
their unions. They paid lavishly and, not surprisingly, found people who
told them what they wanted to hear: that treating workers nicely made
unions unnecessary and companies more efficient. The studies were
completely bogus but the people who conducted them were hailed as
heroes, and provided with lavish funding to continue their research. The
funding started new departments which trained new proteges, each of whom
was taught that the founding studies as gospel. They were told to work
on expanding and refining the results, not results, not questioning
then, and so they did, becoming industrial relations professors in their
own right and continuing the cycle.

Like other bubbles, disciplinary bubbles are difficult to pop. Imagine
you do research outside their incorrect assumptions. Your research will
simply be marginalized and ignored — you don’t get into the conferences
or the journals, it’s just not seen as valid work. And even if you try
to disprove the bogus assumptions, you get ignored. Everyone already in
the field has built their careers on those assumptions. They’ve long
rationalized them to themselves; nobody is going to support someone who
argues their life’s work is built on sand.

Thus ignorance marches on.


djb
===

October 26, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/djb.ja)

* * * * *

[English](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/djb.en)

*translated by [Motohiro Takayama (mootoh)](http://deadbeaf.org/)*

みんなそろそろ D.J. Bernstein
が世界史上最高のプログラマだというのを思い出すべきだと思うんだ。

まず、客観的な事実だけを見てみよう。 djb
は2つの重要なシステムソフトウェアを書いた。 メールサーバと DNS
サーバだ。 どちらも何百万というドメインで使われている。
ありとあらゆる複雑な仕事をこなし、とてつもない高負荷でも問題ないし、どんな異常事態にも対応する。
これらは、Bernstein
が最初にリリースしたときとまったく同じものが動いてるのだ。 ひとつのバグ
(たったひとつ!) が qmail に見つかった。 2つめのバグは、さいきん djbdns
に報告された。
けれど大事なことは、人々がこのバグを見つけるのに、10年近くかかったという事実だ。

こんなことができるプログラマは他にいやしない。 Donald Knuth
はいい線いってるけれど、 TeX について彼が書いた日記
([文芸的プログラミング](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0937073806))
を読めば、
彼が何年もバグを探し続けており、その旅に終わりが来ることがないと考えているのが分かるだろう。
ただ、終わりに漸近するよう、歩みを繰り返すことしかできないのだ
(これがあの奇妙なバージョン番号規則の所以)。 djb
の記録を塗り替えることができないばかりか、誰もその域に近づくことすらできていないのだ。

しかしより重要な要因は、主観的なものだ。 djb
のプログラムは、美術品なんだ。 感性で理解するべき、偉大な作品だ。 djb
のコードは、アウトラインの見た目が、すぐれた芸術のように心地よい。
バランスとリズムがあり、最上のタイポグラフィに勝るとも劣らない。
偉大な詩がそうであるように、ひとつひとつの文字に意味がある。
それぞれの文字は、それが必要だからそこにあるんだ。
けれども、プログラムは読まれるためにだけあるわけじゃない。
優美なダンサーのように、舞うのだ!
それも、ただ一人のダンサーとしてだけでなく、バレエの組曲のように、分割したり、移動させたり、元通りに戻したり、といった処理をめざましい速さで、何度も何度もこなす。

だけど、ダンスと違ってこうした動作には目的がある。
プログラムは、やるべきことを成す。 つまり、 web
サイトをみつけ、メールをあっちからこっちへと運ぶ。
最高にすごいシナリオだと、メールの配送と区分けは、巨大で終わりのないバレエの組曲のようなものだ
。 (ブラジルのシットコム、 “The Office” を思い浮かべてみよう)。
でもこれは一時の幻想なんかじゃない。
あなたのメールは、毎日こんなふうにして処理されているんだ。

それに、このダンスは鑑賞されるだけが目的じゃない。
目的を持ったダンスなんだ。
内部の構造は、可動部分が最小になるよう完璧に作り上げられている。
やるべきタスクを、最小限の労力でこなせるようになっているんだ。
処理内容の分け方、割り振り方においては見事という他ない。
ここで見事だと言っているのは、たんに言語的な意味でだけじゃない。
もちろんそれもあるけどね。
エレガントな数学に裏打ちされている効率の良さがあるからなんだ。
たくさんの数式によって、このプログラムの動作が理論的に完璧であり、これ以上うまいやり方は存在しないことが保証されている。

これだけ書いてもまだ、 djb
ソフトウェアの途方もない美しさを説明しきれてない。 djb
のプログラムは、すごい腕前を持った最強チームが賞賛するような機械であるだけじゃない。
人に使われることを意図した、よく手になじむ小道具でもあるんだ。
優れた工業デザインに見られるように、djb
ソフトウェアには使うたびに喜びがある。

言語、数学、芸術、デザイン、機能の美を兼ね備えた分野が、他にあるだろうか?
プログラミングは、明らかに固有の領域に属している。 ならば、 djb
を打ち負かすことのできるのは誰か?
ここまでの可能性を切り開いてきた者が他にいるだろうか?
そんな可能性があるって知ってる人がいただろうか?

奇妙なことだけれど、 djb
についての嫌悪を露わにしている人たちがたくさんいる。
理由の1つは、天才に対する一般的な嫌悪感によるものだ。 djb
が力強く、妥協のないビジョンを持っているのは明らかで、それが傲慢さとか無礼だとかいう誤解によくつながる。
他の理由としては、実利主義によるすぐれたデザインへの軽視によるものがある。
djb のプログラムは、たいていのプログラムと同じようには動かない。
それには、たいていのプログラムのやり方が間違っているから、というかんたんな理由があるのだけれど。
しかし、djbに対する憎悪はそれ以上に深い。
確証があるわけではないが率直に言うと、趣味のよくないひとびとが、自分たちの理解できないものに対する賞賛を目のあたりにして怒り、不満を感じているのではないかと思う。
すぐれた芸術というのはいつも、誹謗中傷を伴うものなのだ。

ここで言っているのは、 djb の仕事が完璧だ、ということじゃない。
さっき言ったみたいにバグはあるし、ログファイルは優美とは言い難い。 もし
djb
がいまソフトウェアを書き直すとしたら、膨大な変更があることに疑いはない。
でも、じゃあひとつやってみようかと立ち上がった人がいる?
できるかどうかさえ、誰もわかっていないんじゃない? djb
のコードを読むまで、ソフトウェアにおけるすぐれた芸術というものがどういうものか、私にはわからなかった。
そして今では、他のどんなコードを読んでもくすんでるように感じてしまう。

おまけ: ここまで読んできたなら、[いま djb
がやっていること](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001502)
にも興味がわくんじゃないかな。

* * * * *

オリジナル: [djb](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/djb) by Aaron Swartz’s
Raw Thought


The Logic of Google Ads
=======================

November 3, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/adlogic)

* * * * *

When should you buy ads? Let’s assume your goal is for people to click
on the ads and give you money. (Reasons this may not be true:
persuasion, brand-building, budget-maximizing.) The return from a block
of ads is thus revenue - marginal\_costs - ad\_costs. Ads are an
investment like any other; you keep buying them until your return on
investment (revenue - marginal\_costs / ad\_costs) equals your cost of
capital (usually the interest rate).

For simplicity, we’ll assume your marginal cost is zero. (My marginal
cost is almost always zero, so this doesn’t strike me as too
unrealistic.) So how do you estimate revenue? You can track how much
money people who click on your ad give you, but this has two flaws.
First, customers often give you more money over time. Maybe they buy
level one of your video game when they click on the ad, but then they
may buy levels two and three the next day after they beat level one. The
future is always in the future, so revenue-per-user numbers may be too
small.

Second, they might have given you money anyway. Your video game ads
probably run on video game review sites, where readers might buy your
game just from the review, even if you hadn’t bought an ad. So your
revenue numbers may be too big.

But these problems aren’t so serious. In the first case, the worst that
happens is you don’t buy as many ads as you should. In the second, you
don’t actually lose money, it’s just that some extra profit you could
have kept has gone into ads.

* * * * *

Let’s turn to the ad seller. They probably want to maximize how much
they charge per ad impression (CPM). (Reasons this may not be true:
unseemly ads.) A good way to do this is to hold an auction. It’s
impractical to have everyone bid live, so Google auctions work like eBay
auctions: you enter the maximum you’re willing to pay and get charged
just enough to beat the other bidders. (One can think of this as a
computer-simulated auction where everyone keeps bidding up the price by
pennies until they hit the maximum they’re willing to spend.)

But what are you bidding on? Ad sellers want to maximize revenue per
impression, but ad buyers want to maximize profit per expense. In an
ideal world, ad sellers auction off impressions (this is [what Google Ad
Manager
does](https://www.google.com/support/admanager/publisher/bin/answer.py?answer=79210))
while ad buyers bid per dollar of profit (entering their cost of
capital).

Determining how much profit you make from an ad is hard. Can we just
trust you? Let’s say you make \$2 in profit per 1000 impressions and
everyone else makes \$1. Now you can lie and say you make \$1 in profit
and then pay twice as much per profit-dollar. Now you pay the same
amount as before, but you win all the profit-dollar auctions. Now that’s
not wrong — you’re clearly making more money than the other bidders, so
you should win — but your bid isn’t cost-per-profit anymore, it’s
cost-per-impression.

What if you paid based on revenue? Verifying revenue is difficult, but
Google could do it if everyone was using Google Checkout. (If you sent
some of your users to a non-Google Checkout system, Google could catch
you and fine you.) Google offers [nicer
ads](http://checkout.google.com/seller/sales.html) to Checkout users,
but they still don’t have much market share, making this system
impractical at present.

Some search engines apparently had cost-per-action (CPA) auctions, where
you paid based on how many people actually bought things. I have no idea
how they made that work, since lying about how many people took an
action seems really profitable and easy. Maybe that’s why no one does
this anymore.

That just leaves cost-per-click (CPC). Cost-per-click seems ideal, since
it’s verifiable by both the ad seller (who uses a redirect link to track
clicks) and the ad buyer (who sees the users show up on their page).
It’s a nice half-way point between buyer and seller.

So the ad seller holds an auction for CPC and multiplies CPC by
click-thru-rate (CTR) to calculate CPM. They shows the highest CPM ads,
charging each the bidder below them’s CPC, times their relative CTRs.
(In reality, Google doesn’t just use CTR; they also factor in the
relevance of the ad and the quality of the page it goes to.) And, voila:
we’ve derived the basics of an online ad system.

* * * * *

This works out great for the ad seller — they maximize CPM, just like
they wanted — but the ad buyer is still stuck converting their ROI into
CPC. The ad buyer, recall, wants to increase their spending on ads (now
determined to be CPC) until their return on investment equals their cost
of capital.

It seems like this should be pretty easy, and indeed Google does provide
[tools to calculate
ROI](http://www.google.com/adwords/learningcenter/text/19390.html), but
apparently not to optimize it. What they do provide is [a
tool](http://www.google.com/adwords/conversionoptimizer/) to optimize
your cost-per-action. **Does anyone know why this is?**

It seems like an automatic ROI optimizer would lead many people to spend
more money on ads. It’s hard to believe Google is leaving all that money
on the table.

But Google does intelligently optimize the ads themselves. The variance
in click-thru rates between different ads is huge — it’s not uncommon to
see two very similar ads, but one gets ten times as many clicks as the
others. Google lets you put in as many ads as you like and
[automatically rotates
them](http://adwords.google.com/support/aw/bin/answer.py?answer=112876),
showing ads with better CTRs more often.

* * * * *

So far we’ve just had a single ad seller. In the real world, lots of
people want to sell ads and lots of people want to buy them. How do you
match them up?

One option is make the buyer choose. This is how Google Search works:
Google holds an auction for each search query and buyers pick which ones
they want to compete in. Another is to group related websites together
and run ads evenly across all of them. This is how most smaller ad
networks work. And then there’s AdSense. AdSense scans a page for
relevant keywords, then runs the Google Search ads that won auctions for
those keywords.

Google also knows a lot about ad *viewers*. By tracking what web pages
you visit, they know [what topics you’re interested
in](http://www.google.com/ads/preferences). I’m apparently interested in
Unix, the environment, elections, government, and social science, so
Google prefers to show ads on those subjects to me.

**But there’s another way to think about ad matching:** as a giant
optimization problem. Which combinations of user, ad placement, and
advertisement optimize click-thru rates (or, ultimately, ROI)?

For each of these, there are lots of variables. For each user, you know
their history, geographical location, computer (browser, operating
system, screen size), ISP, etc. For each ad placement, you know time of
day, hosting website, page content, etc. And for each ad, there are
numerous possible variations in phrasing and design that can be tested,
as mentioned before.

The possible combinations are infinite. You can’t test all of them, so
you need to come up with ones that are plausible. You can look at which
combinations worked in the past: has this ad done significantly better
in some cities than others, or at some times than others? And you can
look for patterns across ads: do ads that do well on CNN also do well on
MSNBC? These hypotheses can then be tested and, if they work, you start
running ads more there.

Netflix claims they’ve made millions from slight improvements in their
movie recommendations.^[1](#fn:n)^ When they offered a prize for more,
researchers found thousands of tiny patterns and came up with all sorts
of innovative algorithms to try to get an edge. After 32 months,
researchers doubled the algorithm’s effectiveness.

Imagine how much more is at stake for Google. Last year, they received
\$21 *billion* in ad revenue, of which 60% was apparently profit. Even
tiny improvements would be worth the highest salaries — a 0.004%
improvement would make \$500,000. Doubling it would create unspeakable
wealth.

Yet Google has no contest for improving ad click-thru rates. Indeed,
press reports suggest they don’t even have an internal team working on
it. The AdWords user-interface (recently redesigned from jaw-droppingly
wretched to just wretched) would seem to suggest they don’t do this kind
of optimization at all. Their blog asks people to [optimize things
manually](http://adwords.blogspot.com/2008/09/where-are-your-clicks-coming-from.html).
No doubt there are some things humans (even ad purchase reps) can do
better than computers, but surely there’s a lot more they can do
together — with humans giving the machine additional hints and
hypotheses to test. But there doesn’t seem to be anything like that.

It’s hard to believe this is true. It’s hard to believe this can last.

* * * * *

Google’s chief economist
[claims](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/02/our-secret-sauce.html)
that Google’s sewn up the ad market by being better than everyone else.
What if you made an ad network that was better than Google?

Right now Google takes a 20% cut of every auction price. What if you
were willing to take just 10%? You could give ad sellers a slightly
higher CPM — they’d gladly run your ads when they paid more and Google’s
the rest of the time. Then you can offer ad buyers a slightly lower CPC.
As long as the money people made was more than the cost of setting
things up, they’d switch. I’m actually not sure why this hasn’t
happened.

Now imagine that you were a genius CS student who could come up with a
better ad optimization algorithm. Your system would have a higher
overall CTR, since it presented users with better ads. This means that,
again, you can pay higher CPMs (since more people click per impression).
And you can redirect some of the money you would spend on higher CPMs
into lower CPCs, to attract advertisers.

But to develop the algorithms and do the optimization you need the data.
Lots of it — lots of users, lots of advertisers, lots of ad spots. No
startup will ever have that; it’s only left to Google (or whichever
giant eventually replaces them).

I’m not normally one to be too concerned about improving Google’s bottom
line (they seem to be doing alright), but as an ad buyer I’m frustrated
I have to do this work myself. I’d rather solve the problem for
everyone. And if Google wants to pay me for that, I certainly wouldn’t
mind.

* * * * *

1.  It’s weird that Netflix is so much more interested in this than,
    say, Amazon. Amazon makes money on every sale, whereas Netflix loses
    money every time they send a DVD out. Netflix claims they make up
    for this in higher customer retention rates, but why didn’t Amazon
    think of this first? [↩](#fnref:n)




Election Ballot 2009
====================

November 3, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/election09)

* * * * *

I hope that you all vote today if you can.

As the left gained power, many cities switched to off-year elections and
non-partisan candidacy. Removing party affiliations from the ballot
servers as a kind of poll tax, it forces people to spend time
researching each candidate individually instead of just knowing they
support a particular party. For those in Cambridge, MA, I have tried to
help out by doing the research for you.

Cambridge has the additional complication of having a decent voting
system, so you can list your candidates in order of preference. There
are two questions on the ballot. For city council, there seem to be
three basic categories: People with good ideas, people with no ideas,
and people with bad ideas. I have listed them in that order:

1.  Lawrence J. Adkins (more public services, affordable housing and
    health)
2.  Mark Flanagan (homeless shelter)
3.  Larry Ward (inclusionary zoning)
4.  James M. Williamson (elected mayor, street nusiances)
5.  Kenneth E. Reeves (Harlem Children’s Zone)
6.  Charles Marquardt (fire the city manager)
7.  Gregg Moree (energy efficiency, living wage)
8.  Kathy Podgers (housing vouchers, parks)
9.  Tim Toomey (fuel efficient vehicls)
10. Marjorie Decker (community engagement)
11. Neal Leavitt (achievement gap)
12. Silvia Glick (neighborhood protection)
13. Sam Seidel (afterschool)
14. Henrietta Davis (goo-goo)
15. E. Denise Simmons (311)
16. Minka vanBeuzekom (transparency)
17. Tom Stohlman (do nothing)
18. Craig Kelley (traffic enforcement, no TV for kids)
19. Leland Cheung (promote entrepreneurship, school reform)
20. David Maher (segregated schools, service cuts)
21. Edward Sullivan (tough on crime, homeland security)

School issues are inevitably depressing. Everyone says they oppose the
achievement gap and so on, so my first test was to see how people felt
about standardized tests (ordered from opposition to support):

1.  Marc McGovern (community education centers)
2.  Alice Turkel (portfolios, high quality preschool)
3.  Richard Harding (no high-stakes)
4.  Nancy Tauber (no teaching to the test)
5.  Patty Nolan (no drill and kill)
6.  Alan Steinert, Jr. (tests are “something to be endured”)
7.  Joseph Grassi (desegregation)
8.  Fred Fantini (more assessment)
9.  Charles Stead, Sr. (tight ship principal)

Happy Election Day!

**UPDATE:** The winners were (in order): 9, 14, 15, 20, 5, 18, 19, 13,
21. And: 4, 3, 1, 8, 5, 2.


Is the DMCA a scam?
===================

November 14, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kwaze-kwasa)

* * * * *

I received my first DMCA takedown notice today. I published
publicly-available IRS information about the nonprofit Kwaze-Kwasa [USA]
Inc. Kwaze-Kwasa sent a letter to my ISP asking that it be taken down. I
do not know why they want to keep this public information off the
Internet, but I do know that the law lets them.

For those who aren’t familiar, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
contained a section known as OCILLA (distinct from its also-famous
anticircumvention provisions) that regulates publishing copyrighted
material online.

There are three big parties with interests in this subject: copyright
holders, who want strong tools to keep copyrighted material offline;
ISPs, who don’t want copyright law to apply to them’ and Internet users,
who want to be able to publish and read interesting content. OCILLA was
largely written by ISPs and pretty much maximizes their interests at the
expense of copyright holders and users.

I’m very glad that copyright holders get the short end of the stick —
they want to modify the law to make sites like YouTube illegal, just
because some people upload copyrighted material to it. If they had their
way, websites based around user-generated content would pretty much be
impossible.

But I am frustrated the law doesn’t do enough for users. The takedown
notice I was sent was obviously bogus — it didn’t even allege a
copyright violation, since the information I published wasn’t even
copyrightable (it was all basic facts and statistics published by the US
government). Yet my ISP informed me that if I didn’t take the page down,
they’d take my entire website offline. And they have to do that because
if they don’t, they can be sued under the copyright law and could face
very heavy penalties.

To get the page backup, I have to swear under penalty of perjury that I
think the takedown was a mistake (yet the sender of a takedown does not
have to swear that they think the takedown is valid!), consent to a
lawsuit if the sender disagrees, and wait two weeks. Two weeks!

In short, the DMCA lets you get any page taken off the Internet for two
weeks. This isn’t just a law itching for abuse; it’s a law being abused.


How I Hire Programmers
======================

November 29, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hiring)

* * * * *

[Español](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hiring.es)

There are three questions you have when you’re hiring a programmer (or
anyone, for that matter): Are they smart? Can they get stuff done? Can
you work with them? Someone who’s smart but doesn’t get stuff done
should be your friend, not your employee. You can talk your problems
over with them while they procrastinate on their actual job. Someone who
gets stuff done but isn’t smart is inefficient: non-smart people get
stuff done by doing it the hard way and working with them is slow and
frustrating. Someone you can’t work with, you can’t work with.

The traditional programmer hiring process consists of: a) reading a
resume, b) asking some hard questions on the phone, and c) giving them a
programming problem in person. I think this is a terrible system for
hiring people. You learn very little from a resume and people get real
nervous when you ask them tough questions in an interview. Programming
isn’t typically a job done under pressure, so seeing how people perform
when nervous is pretty useless. And the interview questions usually
asked seem chosen just to be cruel. I think I’m a pretty good
programmer, but I’ve never passed one of these interviews and I doubt I
ever could.

So when I hire people, I just try to answer the three questions. To find
out if they can get stuff done, I just ask what they’ve done. If someone
can actually get stuff done they should have done so by now. It’s hard
to be a good programmer without some previous experience and these days
anyone can get some experience by starting or contributing to a free
software project. So I just request a code sample and a demo and see
whether it looks good. You learn an enormous amount really quickly,
because you’re not watching them answer a contrived interview question,
you’re seeing their actual production code. Is it concise? clear?
elegant? usable? Is it something you’d want in your product?

To find out whether someone’s smart, I just have a casual conversation
with them. I do everything I can to take off any pressure off: I meet at
a cafe, I make it clear it’s not an interview, I do my best to be casual
and friendly. Under no circumstances do I ask them any standard
“interview questions” — I just chat with them like I would with someone
I met at a party. (If you ask people at parties to name their greatest
strengths and weaknesses or to estimate the number of piano tuners in
Chicago, you’ve got bigger problems.) I think it’s pretty easy to tell
whether someone’s smart in casual conversation. I constantly make
judgments about whether people I meet are smart, just like I constantly
make judgments about whether people I see are attractive.

But if I had to write down what it is that makes someone seem smart, I’d
emphasize three things. First, do they know stuff? Ask them [what
they’ve been thinking about](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smalltalkq)
and probe them about it. Do they seem to understand it in detail? Can
they explain it clearly? (Clear explanations are a sign of genuine
understanding.) Do they know stuff about the subject that you don’t?

Second, are they curious? Do they reciprocate by asking questions about
you? Are they genuinely interested or just being polite? Do they ask
follow-up questions about what you’re saying? Do their questions make
you think?

Third, do they learn? At some point in the conversation, you’ll probably
be explaining something to them. Do they actually understand it or do
they just nod and smile? There are people who know stuff about some
small area but aren’t curious about others. And there are people who are
curious but don’t learn, they ask lots of questions but don’t really
listen. You want someone who does all three.

Finally, I figure out whether I can work with someone just by hanging
out with them for a bit. Many brilliant people can seem delightful in a
one-hour conversation, but their eccentricities become grating after a
couple hours. So after you’re done chatting, invite them along for a
meal with the rest of the team or a game at the office. Again, keep
things as casual as possible. The point is just to see whether they get
on your nerves.

If all that looks good and I’m ready to hire someone, there’s a final
sanity check to make sure I haven’t been fooled somehow: I ask them to
do part of the job. Usually this means picking some fairly separable
piece we need and asking them to write it. (If you really insist on
seeing someone working under pressure, give them a deadline.) If
necessary, you can offer to pay them for the work, but I find most
programmers don’t mind being given a small task like this as long as
they can open source the work when they’re done. This test doesn’t work
on its own, but if someone’s passed the first three parts, it should be
enough to prove they didn’t trick you, they can actually do the work.

(I’ve known some people who say “OK, well why don’t we try hiring you
for a month and see how it goes.” This doesn’t seem to work. If you
can’t make up your mind after a small project you also can’t make it up
after a month and you end up hiring people who aren’t good enough.
Better to just say no and err on the side of getting better people.)

I’m fairly happy with this method. When I’ve skipped parts, I’ve ended
up with bad hires who eventually had to be let go. But when I’ve
followed it, I’ve ended up with people I like so much so that I actually
feel bad I don’t get to work with them anymore. I’m amazed that so many
companies use such silly hiring methods instead.


Googling for Sociopaths
=======================

December 14, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googled)

* * * * *

One of the best things about capitalism is the way it handles
sociopaths. Major executives look up to Alexander the Great and
apparently try to follow in his footsteps. But instead of leading a
murderous campaign across Asia, they decide to make something people
want: newspapers and movies and television shows. True, they’re far from
perfect, but you have to admit it’s a lot better than mass slaughter.

Many books have been written about Google, even though we’re all pretty
familiar with the company to begin with, but what makes Ken Auletta’s
*Googled* interesting is that it’s a history of the company as told by
the incumbent sociopaths. These are the people Auletta has spent his
life covering: the media moguls who tried to acquire and conquer their
own empires of content and delivery. And to them what’s most shocking
and galling about Google’s incredibly rapid rise is that instead of
being engineered by a fellow sociopath, it was largely done by normal,
decent people plainly applying the forces of new technology.

* * * * *

“What has Google ever done for the world?” ask the sociopaths at various
points throughout the book. “All they do is steal other people’s
content!” To a normal human the question is ridiculous — it’s almost
impossible to imagine life without Googling for something, checking your
Gmail, or watching videos on YouTube — but sociopaths aren’t used to
doing things that create value for people. They’re just interested in
conquering more and taking control. When Disney bought ABC for \$19
billion, it didn’t improve most people’s lives in any real way, but it
did let Michael Eisner regain control of the company he once ran.

So naturally the sociopaths are outraged that their control is being
taken away. Newspapers, book publishers, television companies, ad
agencies — their businesses are all failing, while Google’s is on the
rise. The sociopaths may be outraged, but this is exactly what’s
*supposed* to happen. Most people don’t have a vested interest in
whether ABC does well or even continues to exist. What they want are
good television shows at a reasonable price, and if they can get those
from Apple and Google instead of their local cable company, then bully
for Apple and Google.

The thing that’s hard for the sociopaths to get their head around is
that this isn’t because one of their rivals has outsmarted them — it’s
just the march of technology. When the only way to get most television
shows to people’s houses was over a wire or across airwaves that could
only hold so many channels, their particular distribution model made
sense. But when the same connection — whether cable, DSL, satellite, or
WiFi — can let people download whatever video program they choose, an
entirely new model can take hold. The shift isn’t Google’s fault any
more than America should be blamed for breaking off from Pangea.

As a result, the closest people to moguls behind the recent shifts in
media distribution are two computer science grad students: Larry and
Sergey. These guys don’t even have the decency to behave like real
moguls — they wear t-shirts and sneakers, get bored during meetings, and
like to travel around the world instead of around Manhattan. What’s
worse, they’re constantly talking about “making the world a better
place” (by, for example, donating 1% of their profits to charity) and
“empowering the user” (by cutting out middlemen and not forcing choices
down people’s throats). Sociopaths don’t talk like that! Who do these
people think they are?

Google gets a lot of criticism (often deserved), but it’s worth taking a
moment to think of all the things they haven’t done. If Microsoft had
Google’s market share in search, is there any doubt that they’d be
systematically demoting or even banning their competitors in the search
results? Demoting someone in Google is a virtual death sentence, and yet
not only has Google never been accused of using this vast power, the
idea itself is almost unimaginable.

Hearing things from the sociopaths’ perspective, it’s easy to get
fooled. “Yeah!” you think. “Why should these Google guys get to control
everything?” But for average people, this shift has been great: much
more stuff is available, faster and freer than ever before, and the
people making all the money off of it are actually decent human beings
who feel some responsibility for the planet they inhabit. Sure, I don’t
agree with them on everything and there’s a lot more they can do, but
let’s not lose sight of the basic point: at least they’re not
sociopaths.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1594202354)



Researcher Job
==============

December 27, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/researcherjob)

* * * * *

I’m looking for a researcher to work with on a couple projects. The
research will mostly be into questions of United States government
policy and the relevant factual basis. For example, you might be asked
to look up things about cap-and-trade legislation and the evidence for
anthropogenic global warming. You can do it part-time. You can work from
anywhere. I think the work will be interesting and I’ll be doing it too.
I think the work will be important, which is why I’m doing it.

The requirements are:

-   generally lefty politics

-   the ability to figure out the answers to complicated and politically
    controversial questions and find primary sources supporting those
    answers

-   the ability to write clear summaries of those answers

The ideal person is probably someone who’s contributed to Wikipedia, but
that’s not a requirement.

If you’re interested, send a paragraph you wrote explaining or
summarizing something to [me@aaronsw.com with “researcher” in the
subject](mailto:me@aaronsw.com?subject=researcher). If you have ideas
for how to find people like this, post them in the comments. (Or email
them. Whatever.) I’ll probably end up hiring a bunch of researchers so
the more people and ideas the better.


Against Reflective Equilibrium (or, What is ethics for?)
========================================================

December 30, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ethicsfor)

* * * * *

Imagine you were an early settler of what is now the United States. It
seems likely you would have killed native Americans. After all, your
parents killed them, your siblings killed them, your friends killed
them, the leaders of the community killed them, the President killed
them. Chances are, you would have killed them too, and you probably
wouldn’t have seen anything wrong with this.

Indeed, it probably wouldn’t even have occurred to you to think about
the morality of this. If you did, it would probably seem just. They were
trying to kill *you*! And your family! Going after them was just
self-defense! (It wasn’t, of course; you invaded *their* land.)

Or if you see nothing wrong with killing native Americans, take the
example of slavery. Again, everyone had slaves and probably didn’t think
too much about the morality of it. That was just the way the world was.
If you were asked about the big moral questions you faced, you’d
probably think of things like the proper time to pay back a loan, or
lying to your wife, or maybe a child’s duty of obedience to their
father.

Today, looking back on people who murder native American and keep
slaves, those seem like comparatively small potatoes. Sure, we justify
it by saying that they were just people of their time, but still… It’s
hard to get over the fact that George Washington ordered his general to
“lay waste all the settlements around…that the country may not be merely
overrun, but destroyed.” (He also ordered that they not “listen to any
overture of peace before the total ruin of their settlements is
effected. Our future security will be in…the terror with which the
severity of the chastisement they receive will inspire them.”) It
somehow colors everything he says. Whatever he may have thought about
loan repayment or lying, slavery was the big moral question of his time,
and (in practice, at least) he got it wrong.

We don’t kill native Americans much these days and we don’t keep slaves,
but it’s hard to believe that our era must be morally perfect. Surely if
people back then could make such huge moral blunders, we could be making
similar ones right now. And ethical philosophy is useless if it can’t
help us avoid such huge mistakes.

Some people suggest that the way to do ethical philosophy is to listen
to our intuitions. “I do not think our intuitions about cases are less
reliable than those about principles,” Frances Kamm argues.

But *of course* our intuitions about cases are less reliable! If we
could simply trust our intuitions, we wouldn’t need ethical philosophy
at all. If something was wrong, we would just know it was wrong. There
would be nothing philosophy could tell us.

Obviously this is absurd. Lots of people do things that seem clearly
unethical while thinking they’re in the right. Perhaps Kamm thinks these
mistakes are merely the result of temporary passions and that from her
desk at Harvard she can consider such question with a more objective
eye.

But, as I have shown, people’s intuitions about cases are
*systematically* distorted. Sitting at a desk wasn’t enough to persuade
George Washington to stop killing native Americans. His mistake wasn’t
the result of some momentary passion, but of an entire culture that had
normalized mass murder and a society that depended on it. To think that
he would just suddenly sit down and go “Hmm, murdering Indians feels
wrong to me” is ridiculous. The only way he would possibly conclude that
is by taking seriously his *principles*.

I grew up eating animals. I saw nothing wrong with this. My parents ate
them, my siblings ate them, my friends ate them, people on TV ate them,
the President ate them. I doubt I stopped to think about the morality of
eating animals any more than I stopped to think about the morality of
brushing my teeth. If you asked me for my intuition, I would have said
eating animals was just fine. It was only when I stopped eating animals
that my intuitions began to change.


Cómo contrato programadores
===========================

December 30, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hiring.es)

* * * * *

[English](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/hiring.en)

*traducido por
[iPodizados](http://www.ipodizados.com/4558/contrato-programadores-aaron-swartz)*

Hay tres preguntas cuando estás contratando a un programador (o a
cualquier otro trabajador, para el caso): ¿Es inteligente? ¿Puede sacar
el trabajo adelante? ¿Puedo trabajar con él? Alguien que sea inteligente
pero que no saca el trabajo adelante debería ser tu amigo, no tu
empleado. Puedes hablar sobre tus problemas mientras procastinan
(posponer conscientemente un trabajo que sabemos que tenemos que hacer)
con su trabajo real. Alguien que saca adelante el trabajo pero que no es
inteligente, es ineficiente: los que no son inteligentes sacan el
trabajo adelante usando el camino más difícil y trabajar con ellos es
lento y frustran. Por último, alguien con quien no puedes trabajar…
bueno, pues no puedes trabajar con él.

El proceso tradicional de contratación de programadores consiste en: a)
leer un curriculum, b) realizar algunas preguntas difíciles en una
conversación telefónica, y c) darles un problema de programación en
persona. Creo que es un sistema horrible para contratar a alguien. Se
puede aprender muy poco de un curriculum y la gente se pone nerviosa
cuando les haces preguntas complejas en una entrevista. Programar no es
el típico trabajo que se hace bajo presión, así que ver cómo se comporta
alguien cuando está nervioso es bastante inútil. Y las preguntas de la
entrevista que normalmente se formulan parecen escogidas simplemente
para que sean crueles. Creo que soy un programador bastante bueno, pero
nunca he superado una de esas entrevistas y dudo que nunca lo pueda
hacer.

Así que cuando tengo que contratar gente, intento responder a las tres
preguntas [que planteaba al principio]. Para saber si pueden sacar el
trabajo adelante, les pregunto qué han hecho. Si de verdad hacen su
trabajo, a estas alturas deberían tener algo ya hecho. Es difícil ser
buen programador sin algún tipo de experiencia previa y en estos días
todo el mundo puede obtener experiencia colaborando en algún proyecto de
software libre. Así que les pido una muestra del código y una
demostración y miro a ver si me gusta. Aprendes un montón rápidamente,
porque no les estás mirando mientras responden a una compleja pregunta
de entrevista, sino que estás viendo el código real que han producido.
¿Es conciso? ¿Claro? ¿Elegante? ¿Usable? ¿Es algo que querrías en tu
producto?

Para saber si alguien es inteligente, tengo una conversación informal
con ellos. Hago todo lo posible por eliminar la presión: me encuentro
con la persona en un café, les digo claramente que no es una entrevista,
hago todo lo que puedo por ser informal y amigable. Bajo ningún pretexto
les hago “preguntas estándar” de entrevista. Simplemente hablo con ellos
como lo haría con alguien que conozco en una fiesta. (Si le pides a la
gente que conoces en una fiesta que enumeren sus puntos fuertes y
débiles o que estimen el número de afinadores de piano que hay en
Madrid, tienes problemas más importantes). Creo que es bastante sencillo
saber si alguien es inteligente mientras sostienes una conversación
informal con él. Constantemente hago juicios sobre si la gente que estoy
conociendo es inteligente, de la misma forma que constantemente estoy
evaluando si la gente que veo me parece atractiva.

Pero si tuviera que escribir qué es lo que hace que alguien me parezca
inteligente, pondría el énfasis en tres cosas. La primera ¿tienen
conocimientos? Pregúntales en qué han estado pensado y comprueba su
nivel de conocimiento sobre ello. ¿Parecen comprenderlo al detalle?
¿Pueden explicarlo claramente? (explicaciones claras son un signo de que
realmente conocen la materia). ¿Saben cosas sobre ese tema que tú no
sabes?

Segunda, ¿son curiosos? ¿Responden haciéndote preguntas sobre ti? ¿Están
genuinamente interesados o simplemente están siendo educados? ¿Realizan
preguntas sobre lo que estás diciendo? ¿Te hacen pensar sus preguntas?

Tercero, ¿Aprenden? En algún punto de la conversación, probablemente
acabarás explicándole algo. ¿Lo entienden de verdad o simplemente
asienten y sonríen? Hay gente que sabe cosas sobre alguna pequeña área,
pero no tienen curiosidad con respecto a otras. Y hay gente que es
curiosa pero no aprende, realizan muchas preguntas pero en realidad no
están escuchando. Y yo quiero alguien que cumpla las tres cosas
[escuchar+preguntar+aprender].

Finalmente, concluyo si puedo trabajar con alguien pasando algún tiempo
con esa persona. Mucha gente brillante puede parecer agradable en una
conversación de una hora, pero sus excentricidades se hacen patentes
después de un par de horas. Así que, una vez que hayas acabado la
charla, invítale a comer con el resto del equipo o a jugar a algo en la
oficina. Por supuesto, mantengo las cosas tan informales como sea
posible. El objetivo es, precisamente, ver si te ponen de los nervios.

Si todo parece correcto y ya me siento preparado para contratar a
alguien, hago una pequeña comprobación final de seguridad para confirmar
que no me la han dado con queso: les pido que hagan una parte del
trabajo. Normalmente, esto supone escoger una parte del proyecto
suficientemente independiente y pedir que la escriban (si realmente
necesitas ver a alguien trabajando bajo presión, ponles una fecha de
entrega). Si es necesario, puedes ofrecer pagarles por el trabajo, pero
a la mayoría de los programadores que me he encontrado no les importa
que les encargues una tarea pequeña como esta siempre y cuando puedan
publicar el código de su trabajo cuando esté acabado. Esta prueba no
funciona por ella misma, pero si alguien ha pasado las primeras tres
partes, debería ser suficiente para probar que no te han engañado, y que
realmente pueden sacar adelante el trabajo.

(He conocido gente que me dice “Perfecto, ¿por qué no probamos a
contratarte un mes y vemos cómo sale? Esto no parece funcionar. Si no
puedes hacerte una idea después de encargarle un pequeño trabajo,
también podría pasarte que un mes después tampoco tuvieras una opinión
clara y has acabado contratando gente que no son suficientemente buenos.
Mejor decir directamente no y equivocarse por el lado de intentar
conseguir a los más indicados [que acabar con alguien que no da la
talla].

Estoy bastante contento con este método. Cuando me he saltado algunas
partes, he acabado con contrataciones fallidas que finalmente he tenido
que deshacer. Pero cuando las he seguido, he conseguido gente que me
gusta tanto que me siento mal si tengo que dejar de trabajar con ellos.

Me sorprende que en vez de esta perspectiva, haya tantas empresas que
utilicen unas técnicas tan estúpidas para contratar.


A Backup Solution?
==================

January 3, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/backup2009)

* * * * *

For years I’ve wanted a backup solution that just works. ([Here’s a blog
post from 2006 asking for
it.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lazybackup)) The recent Coding Horror
disaster got me thinking that this year I should take another look.

There have been some great strides in backup software in recent years.
For Unix, there’s rdiff-backup , duplicity, brackup, and tarsnap. For
Macs, there’s Time Machine (which doesn’t support remote backups),
BackBlaze, Mozy, and Carbonite (which don’t do full-disk backups). None
of them seem to just work.

It seems amazing to me how bandwidth and disk drives have gotten huge in
recent years, while backup software has gotten more conservative and
efficiency-obsessed. If you want to make regular copies of your entire
disk, the best program is still old-fashioned `dump`, a program written
in the era of tape drives. All the state-of-the-art stuff is designed to
run on particular folders.

But then I found
[CrashPlan](http://b9.crashplan.com/consumer/index.html). For \$100, you
can back up all your machines to it as often as you like. The
installation process is super-simple, it runs in the background without
killing your net connection (BackBlaze would always slow my machine and
my network down), and it works on Macs as well as Unix. It even makes it
easy to control remote headless servers — just open an SSH tunnel to the
machine you want to configure and you can use your local client to
configure the remote machine.

The only trouble is that it [doesn’t support bare-metal
restores](https://crashplan.zendesk.com/forums/30387/entries/29297) or
[xattr](http://support.crashplan.com/doku.php/articles/supported_metadata).
I don’t understand why and hope that’ll be fixed.

Does anyone know of a better solution?

**Update:** Everyone hates Mozy. [SpiderOak](https://spideroak.com/)
seems interesting, but is even less designed for full-disk backup.


2009 Review of Books
====================

January 3, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2009)

* * * * *

Well, it’s time for my annual look back thru the books I read this year.
(Previously: [2006](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006),
[2007](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2007),
[2008](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2008books).) I’ve included links to
reviews, where I have them, and italicized the titles of the books I
recommend without reservation.

1.  The Liberal Hour ([my review: 3
    stars](http://www.amazon.com/review/R2CKO3K5WR85YB/))
2.  Depression Economics
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R21WP6BGGG59R3/))
3.  The Great Derangement
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R32I4OZJU4C5UQ/))
4.  Politics the Wellstone Way
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R1NLP4VN68PP0A/))
5.  Who Really Rules? ([5](http://www.amazon.com/review/RD66PCB1QYMH2/))
6.  Fat Cats and Democrats
    ([3](http://www.amazon.com/review/R2E9UW6NKMWA6J/))
7.  For Common Things
8.  Who Governs?
9.  Supreme: The Story of the Year
    ([2](http://www.amazon.com/review/R11TF84EZX5F0W/))
10. Changing the Powers that Be
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/RJWTNES8RE9XJ/))
11. New Kings of Nonficton
12. On Writing Well ([3](http://www.amazon.com/review/R3F9RZ7Q6X6BRS/))

    This book is really dreadful, mostly because the author actually
    cannot write well.

13. [*The Power Broker*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245)
    ([5](http://www.amazon.com/review/RXOVNQ3JLY6GF/))

    I cannot possibly say enough good things about this book. Go read
    it. Right now. Yes, I know it’s long, but trust me, you’ll wish it
    was longer. I think it may be simply the best nonfiction book.

14. What Are Intellectuals Good For?
15. Priorities in Health
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R3312XB4IFMO2R/))
16. Invisible Hands
17. The Option of Urbanism
18. Getting There
19. On Directing Film
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R30QYA1TV8GOIJ/))

    Not just a great book about directing, but a great book about
    *writing*.

20. The High Cost of Free Parking
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R370YSX27EUSZS/))
21. The Leftmost City
22. Outliers
23. The Hearts of Men ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/RRW8N49XT2TYR/))
24. The Power Elite and the State
    ([3](http://www.amazon.com/review/RTBH5SLNQ9JZQ/))
25. Southern California Country
26. Seeing Like a State
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/RX1CTSTZLCNO5/))
27. Traffic
28. Fast Food Nation
29. Building Rules ([2](http://www.amazon.com/review/R3GHIL6NUKLFWE/))
30. Urban Fortunes ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R203162R8QOQ3D/))
31. Falling Behind
32. [The Sources of Social Power, Vol.
    2](http://books.theinfo.org/go/052144585X)

    Not an easy book, but Michael Mann continues to amaze.

33. Divided Highways
34. Prisoner’s Dilemma
35. Running After Antelope
36. Cities of Tomorrow
37. Suburb ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R171OSWU5ATSOH/))
38. [*The Social Life of Small Urban
    Spaces*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/097063241X)

    If Feynman was a sociologist, this is probably the book he’d write.
    A delightful little thing.

39. Downtown
40. Radical Innocent
41. Suburban Nation
42. Zoned Out
43. [*American Apartheid*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0674018214)

    This book is criminally under-publicized. Everyone has their own
    crazy theories about why it is that blacks are disadvantaged in our
    society. Massey and Denton show it’s much more obvious than any of
    that: they’re victims of extreme segregation, with all the negative
    effects that entails. An absolutely brilliant book.

44. Crabgrass Frontier
45. Human Consequences of Urbanism
46. The Essential William H. Whyte
47. Gridlock Economy
48. Barbed Wire: A Political History
49. Market Rebels
50. Blockbusting in Baltimore
51. Chicago: A Biography of the City and Its Region
52. The Zoning Game
53. Zoned American
54. Bourgeois Nightmares
55. The Zoning of America
56. The Sun Also Rises
57. Bourgeois Utopias
58. Planned Sprawl
59. Block By Block
60. Opus 300
61. [The Path to Power](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679729453)

    After you finish *The Power Broker*, if you want more, read this.

62. Means of Ascent
63. Death at an Early Age
64. A City Transformed
65. Master of the Senate
66. City of Quartz
67. [*The Liberal Defence of
    Murder*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1844672409)

    This book is like a little miracle. I’m not even sure how to
    describe it, except to say that it turns one’s understanding of
    history completely upside-down.

68. [Categorically Unequal](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0871545845)

    If you’re interested in inequality, this little overview is the
    place to start.

69. Side Effects
70. [*The Fox and the Hedgehog*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1566630193)

    Absolutely delightful.

71. The Threat to Reason
72. Plunder and Blunder
73. The Waxman Report
74. Who Rules America? (6th ed.)
75. [Angler](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0143116169)

    Great introduction to how to use “the bureaucracy” and Cheney’s
    utter deviousness.

76. Chief of Staff
77. [Showdown at Gucci Gulch](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394758110)

    Best book I’ve found on how positive bills actually get passed.

78. So Much Damn Money
79. Return of the L Word
80. The Way We Live Now
81. American Project
82. Streetcar Suburbs
83. Creating the Second Ghetto
84. Strangers in a Strange Land
85. Economic Growth and Neighborhood Discontent
86. The Federal Bulldozer
87. The Life You Can Save
88. Justice (Sandel)
89. Acme 18
90. The World We Have Lost
91. [Reason & Persuasion: Three Dialogues by
    Plato](http://www.reasonandpersuasion.com/)

    Great fun.

92. Two Memoirs (Keynes)
93. *Bat Boy: The Musical*

    If you ever get a chance, go see it. It’s the greatest musical ever.

94. John Maynard Keynes (Skidelsky)
95. Facing Unpleasant Facts
96. [*Bad Samaritans*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B002VPE6ZC)

    The best introduction to the real issues of globalization and
    international development.

97. Reclaiming Development
98. Kicking Away the Ladder
99. Democracy and Disobedience
100. Infinite Jest
101. Elegant Complexity
102. Inequality and Industrial Change
    ([4](http://www.amazon.com/review/R20404QWHD9MI7/))
103. Network Power
104. [*The General Theory of Employment, Money, and
    Interest*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/generaltheory)
105. Created Unequal
106. The Roseto Story
107. Political Economy of Industrial Policy
108. Deception and Abuse at the Fed
109. Balancing Acts
110. The Global Class War
111. Untitled New Deal Manuscript (Domhoff)
112. Acme 17
113. Secrets of the Temple
114. Supercapitalism
115. Political Control of the Economy
116. Freshman Orientation
117. Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process
118. The Political Economy of Trust
119. The Audacity to Win
120. Googled
121. Fantastic Mr. Fox
122. Dismantling Utopia
123. Rub Three Times
124. [The Latke Who Couldn’t Stop Screaming: A Christmas
    Story](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1932416870)
125. Adventures in Cartooning
126. The Composer is Dead
127. Horseradish
128. [*Nemesis*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0749304650)

    A wonderful book for anyone interested in how science is actually
    done. ([chapter 1](http://muller.lbl.gov/pages/nemch1.htm),
    [chapters 2-4](http://muller.lbl.gov/pages/Nemesis%20Chapters/))

129. Keynes: Return of the Master
130. Chris Ware (Raeburn)
131. [Gaming the Vote](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B002SB8OMA)

    Poundstone’s really become an amazing writer. While this isn’t as
    good as *[Fortune’s
    Formula](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0809045990)* it really is quite
    fun. Poundstone takes a rather novel tack in making the argument for
    voting system reform. Instead of saying that it will allow for
    third-parties to get a fair hearing, he argues it will protect the
    major parties from the insidious effect of spoilers.

    Furthermore, instead of IRV, Approval, or even Condorcet voting, he
    endorses Range Voting as the best voting system, arguing against
    Condorcet on some weird grounds about determinant ballots that just
    doesn’t make sense to me (p. 226).

    Both of these seem reasonable when Poundstone lays them out, but are
    totally insane upon further inspection. Voting reform may protect
    against spoilers in the short-term, but in the long term it’ll
    likely doom us to some kind of fractured multiparty system. (That’s
    not to say it’s a bad thing.) And range voting, like its proponents,
    is totally batshit insane. (He even passes on their ridiculous
    claims about it being better than democracy with a straight face.)

    Let’s think about this for a second. Strategic voting with a range
    ballot (which even range voting’s proponents say they’ll do) is
    simply approval voting (plus maybe some meaningless nursery effect —
    if you want that, just have a nonbinding approval box or something).
    So for the system to work, it depends on people voting
    astrategically. But obviously those people’s votes will count less
    than strategic votes. So range voting’s only advantage over approval
    voting is that it counts the votes of naive voters less. How is that
    fair?

    I think the Range Voting comparison with Condorcet is rigged; you’ll
    notice they never provide any explanation for why their supposedly
    strategic Condorcet behavior is actually strategic. And the only
    strategic Condorcet behavior Poundstone provides is trying to create
    a tie to force it into sequential dropping, which seems wildly
    implausible in a real-life scenario. So it still seems Condorcet
    outperforms them all.

132. [If You’re an Egalitarian, How Come You’re So
    Rich?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0674006933)

    I really enjoyed this book. It starts with a simple thought
    experiment: imagine you had a long-lost identical twin who grew up
    in a conservative home and became a conservative. You, by contrast,
    grew up in a liberal home and became a liberal. Wouldn’t meeting him
    make you question your beliefs? And thus, shouldn’t the possibility
    that you *could* meet him make you question your beliefs? (I’m not
    totally convinced by this; my beliefs are much more shaken by
    converts — people who were strong believers in X but converted to
    believing in Y.)

    From this, Cohen heads to a reminiscence of his own upbringing,
    which I found especially touching, perhaps because he has the
    identity I wish I had: a Canadian communist in an antireligious
    Yiddish-speaking home. In the middle there’s a good bit on Hegel,
    Marx, and why not to heighten the contradictions, and he concludes
    by refuting Rawls with the same argument Matt Yglesias used on Kent
    Conrad: Rawls says that in a just society, everyone would embrace
    the Difference Principle, but the Difference Principle allows for
    differences because some people will work harder if they get more,
    but if those people embrace the principle then why wouldn’t they
    give their money to the poor and embrace egalitarianism? He ends by
    addressing the title question and accepting a sort of Yglesian
    approach to politics: an overriding concern with the structure of
    political institutions, but also a strong sense of moral demands for
    people to achieve they best they can within existing structures.

    Finally, it got me wondering: a lot of Marx (and, I would add,
    Keynes) thinks about the future as some sort of society where
    industrial products give us abundance and economic laws loosen their
    hold on us. The industrial revolution didn’t do that, but perhaps
    the post-scarcity technological future might?

And my first book of the new year is Daniel Ellsberg’s
*[Secrets](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0142003425)*, which I’m already
loving.


Do It Now
=========

January 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/doitnow)

* * * * *

A year or two ago, I came up with a brilliant scheme for handling my
email. The problem, I decided, was that there was just too much of it.
Spam was mixed in with notes from friends along with important things
from work and todo items I’d written to myself. What I needed to do was
go thru and sort it — pick out the really important stuff to handle
right away and move the junk to the bottom. So I wrote a little program
that would let me go through and sort my email into neat little folders
ordered by priority.

Well, here’s what happened: I sorted all my email, and then I didn’t
answer any of it. I told myself that I shouldn’t answer the unimportant
stuff until the important stuff was taken care of, then when I looked at
the important stuff it seemed hard, so I decided to go read some blogs
first. To this day, all those important emails are just sitting there.

Recently, I came up with a really dumb system for handling my email:
just do it. I’d start at the top of my inbox, answer the most recent
email, and move on to the next one. No excuses. No matter what the email
at the top was — no matter how difficult or awkward or unimportant, I
had to answer it. I couldn’t move on to another email and come back to
it later. I had to answer the most recent email, no matter what it was.

By the end of the day, I’d answered a month’s worth of email.

We procrastinate because we are afraid. We’re afraid it’s too much work
and that it will drain us. We’re afraid we’ll screw it up and get in
trouble. We’re afraid we don’t know how to do it. We’re afraid because,
well, we’ve been putting it off forever and every time we put it off it
seems a little more fearsome in our minds. That’s why not putting things
off is so liberating. We’re forced to confront our fears, not let them
grow bigger by repeatedly running away. And when we confront them, we
find they’re not so scary after all.

This doesn’t just apply to email, of course — it works for any todo
list. But only if you say no to reordering, prioritizing, estimating
deadlines, and doing the most important things first. Forget all that.
Do it now.


Should our cognitive biases have moral weight?
==============================================

January 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/moralbiases)

* * * * *

In [a classic piece of
psychology](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=15957198663841029024),
Kahneman and Tversky ask people what to do about a fatal disease that
600 people have caught. One group is asked whether they would administer
a treatment that would definitely save 200 people’s lives or one with a
33% chance of saving 600 people. The other group is asked whether they
would administer a treatment under which 400 people would definitely die
or one where there’s a 33% chance that no one will die.

The two questions are the same: saving 600 people means no one will die,
saving just 200 means the other 400 will die. But people’s responses
were radically different. The vast majority of people chose to save 200
people for sure. But an equally large majority chose to take the chance
that no one will die. In other words, just changing how you describe the
option — saying that it saves lives rather than saying it leaves people
to die — changes which option most people will pick.

In the same way that Festinger, et. al. showed that our intuitions are
biased [by our social
situation](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ethicsfor), Kahneman and
Tversky demonstrated that humans suffer from consistent cognitive biases
as well. In a whole host of examples, they showed people behaving in a
way we wouldn’t hesitate to think was irrational — like changing their
position on whether to administer a treatment based on what it was
called. (I think a similar problem affects our intuitions about killing
versus letting die.)

This is a major problem for people like Frances Kamm, who think our
moral philosophy must rely on our intuitions. If people consistently and
repeatedly treat things differently based on what they’re called, are we
forced to give that moral weight? Is it OK to administer a treatment
when it’s described as saving people, but not when it’s described as not
saving enough? Surely moral rules should meet some minimal standard of
rationality.

This problem affects a question close to Kamm’s work: what she calls the
Problem of Distance in Morality (PDM). Kamm says that her intuition
consistently finds that moral obligations attach to things that are
close to us, but not to thinks that are far away. According to her, if
we see a child drowning in a pond and there’s a machine nearby which,
for a dollar, will scoop him out, we’re morally obligated to give the
machine a dollar. But if the machine is here but the scoop and child are
on the other side of the globe, we don’t have to put a dollar in the
machine.

But, just as with how things are called, our intuitions about distance
suffer from cognitive biases. Numerous studies have shown that the way
we think about things nearby is radically different from the way we
think about things far away. In [one
study](http://www.scribd.com/doc/24928678/Lessons-from-a-Faraway-land-The-effect-of-spatial-distance-on-creative-cognition),
Indiana University students did better on a creativity test when they
were told the test was devised by IU students studying in Greece than
when they were told it was devised by IU students studying in Indiana.

It’s a silly example, but it makes the point. If our creativity depends
on whether someone mentions Greece or Purdue, it’s no surprise our
answers to moral dilemmas depend on whether they take place in the US or
China. But surely these differences have no more moral validity than the
ones that result from Tversky’s experiment — they’re just an unfortunate
quirk of how we’re wired. Rational reflection — not faulty intuitions —
should be the test of a moral theory.


Is Apple Evil?
==============

January 27, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ipad)

* * * * *

Today’s iPad introduction has to be about the most depressing Apple
product launch I’ve ever watched. As has been
[noted](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2009/09/18/siegler-jobs), Jobs’
Reality Distortion Field only works when he believes in what he’s
selling and he didn’t seem to really believe in this. The audience must
have further added to the disappointment, expecting a revolutionary
product and only getting an oversized iPhone (iPod touch, actually).

That’s not to say the iPad won’t sell, or that I don’t want one. The
scariest thing is that I think it probably will. It’s clear that Apple
plans for the iPhone OS to be the future of its product line. And that’s
scary because the iPhone OS is designed for Apple’s total control.

A lot of people have argued that requiring Apple to approve every
application for the iPhone OS is some kind of “mistake”, something
they’ll remedy as soon as they realize how bad things have gotten. But
recent events — Phil Schiller’s personal interventions, comments on
their call to analysts, etc. — have made it clear it’s not a mistake at
all. It’s their plan.

The iPad is their attempt to extend this total control to what’s
traditionally been thought of as the computer space. This is just the
first step, but it’s not hard to imagine Apple doing their best to phase
out the Macintosh in the next decade, just as they phased out OS 9. In
their ideal world, all computing will be done on the iPhone OS.

And the iPhone OS will only run software that they specifically approve.
No Flash or other alternate runtimes, no one-off apps or open source
customizations. Just total control by Apple. It’s a frightening future.

I don’t know why they’re doing it. It’s hard to see how it makes them
more money. (Curating all those apps must be expensive, not to mention
the lost sales from the unapproved ones.) I can only presume it’s a
result of Jobs’ megalomaniacal need for control — not only does the
hardware have to be flawless, the software must be too. And the only way
to ensure that is to have Apple approve every inch of it.

I love Apple products. I’m a huge Apple fan. I’d buy an iPad right now
if I could. But, for the first time, I’ve got a real sinking feeling in
my stomach.


Fewer Representatives or More Monitors?
=======================================

January 30, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fewerreps)

* * * * *

Matt Yglesias saw Lawrence Lessig speak about the problem of money in
politics concluded his concern on the influence of money in politics was
“[too
narrow](http://yglesias.thinkprogress.org/archives/2010/01/for-less-voting.php)”.
I tend to agree that Lessig’s focus is a bit too narrow — that’s why I
started [the PCCC](http://boldprogressives.org/) — but I was shocked by
Yglesias’ “broader” solution: fewer elected officials.

Matt’s focus on institutional reforms is definitely a well-needed
antidote to most political journalists’ tendency to focus on
personalities and other small-picture details, but in this instance it’s
just crazy. In what sense is the number of elected officials broader
than the influences that come to bear on them?

Matt seems to be arguing that countries with fewer elected officials are
better run because voters can monitor the performance of those officials
better. I don’t see how this argument can possibly survive engagement
with the details of our political system.

Let’s take health care, since that’s in the news lately. Health care has
basically been talked about nonstop by every news outlet, yet even
voters who follow these things in detail have no clue what’s really in
it. (This is true even of my friends who are political junkies; they
know a public option isn’t in the bill, but they basically have no idea
what the exchanges are or how they would work.) When election season
rolls around, campaigns will begin running lots of ads about the health
care bill. None of these ads will help inform them what’s in it. And the
press will continue not to inform them about what’s in it.

I don’t see how having fewer elected officials will change any of this.
The problem is not that voters try to monitor their elected officials
but are simply overwhelmed; the problem is that voters have no tools for
actually monitoring their elected officials in any meaningful sense.
Yes, one can point to a [Chris Hayes
flowchart](http://www.donkeylicious.com/2009/09/improved-health-insurance-reform.html)
here or [an Alec MacGillis
guide](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/08/14/AR2009081401669.html)
there, but there’s no way any significant number of voters know how to
find those things. And even if you tell them about those, there’s no
system for finding similar documents about issues in the future.

And that’s the biggest issue Congress is considering this session! And
that’s just its broadest outlines! The health care bill has thousands of
pages of detailed provisions and it’s just one of thousands of bills
Congress is trying to pass. There’s nobody who’s even reading all of
those provisions, let alone trying to figure out which ones are good
ideas and which representatives are fighting for the good ideas.

Instead, there’s a vast industry of lobbyists, each of which care really
deeply about a handful of those tiny issues and are willing to spend
vast amounts of money and effort persuading members of Congress to take
their side. On most issues, they face no opposition. So naturally, the
members take their side.

What’s needed is not fewer representatives, but better monitoring
systems and institutional incentives to make monitoring less necessary.
Better monitoring systems is what I’m working on and better
institutional incentives is what Lessig is fighting for. If Matt thinks
that fewer representatives is a better or “broader” solution, I’d like
to hear him explain how it’s going to help.

*Disclosure: I’m on the board of Lessig’s group, Change Congress.*


The Vioxx Story
===============

February 10, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/vioxx)

* * * * *

In his book *[Doubt is Their
Product](http://books.theinfo.org/go/019530067X)*, David Michaels
(currently head of OSHA) tells the Vioxx story in a way I’d never heard
before (pp. 146-147):

Aspirin and Aleve work by inhibiting the COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes.
Inhibiting COX-2 lessens pain, but inhibiting COX-1 causes stomach
problems like bleeding and ulcers. So the new class of COX-2 inhibitors,
like Vioxx, were supposed to stop the pain without the nasty stomach
side-effects.

Of course, aspirin has the additional side effect of protecting your
heart, so when they designed a study demonstrating the benefits of
Vioxx, they made sure to a) exclude anyone with heart problems, and b)
compare it against Aleve, which doesn’t have the same beneficial effects
for the heart.

The result of the study was shocking: despite all these efforts, the
people who took Vioxx had 4 times the number of heart problems as the
people who took Aleve. So what did the makers of Vioxx do? They told the
FDA that this study showed how incredibly effective *Aleve* was at
reducing heart attacks! Yes, it wasn’t that Vioxx increased the risk of
a heart attack by 4 times — it was that Aleve magically reduced heart
attacks by 80%.

And the FDA believed them.


When Is Transparency Useful?
============================

February 11, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/usefultransparency)

* * * * *

*The following essay appears in the new O’Reilly book* [Open
Government](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0596804350) *and attempts to
combine and clarify some of the points I made in previous essays. It was
written in June 2009.*

*Transparency* is a slippery word; the kind of word that, like *reform*,
sounds good and so ends up getting attached to any random political
thing that someone wants to promote. But just as it’s silly to talk
about whether “reform” is useful (it depends on the reform), talking
about transparency in general won’t get us very far. Everything from
holding public hearings to requiring police to videotape interrogations
can be called “transparency”—there’s not much that’s useful to say about
such a large category.

In general, you should be skeptical whenever someone tries to sell you
on something like “reform” or “transparency.” In general, you should be
skeptical. But in particular, reactionary political movements have long
had a history of cloaking themselves in nice words. Take the Good
Government (goo-goo) movement early in the twentieth century. Funded by
prominent major foundations, it claimed that it was going to clean up
the corruption and political machines that were hindering city
democracy. Instead, the reforms ended up choking democracy itself, a
response to the left-wing candidates who were starting to get elected.

The goo-goo reformers moved elections to off-years. They claimed this
was to keep city politics distinct from national politics, but the real
effect was just to reduce turnout. They stopped paying politicians a
salary. This was supposed to reduce corruption, but it just made sure
that only the wealthy could run for office. They made the elections
nonpartisan. Supposedly this was because city elections were about local
issues, not national politics, but the effect was to increase the power
of name recognition and make it harder for voters to tell which
candidate was on their side. And they replaced mayors with unelected
city managers, so winning elections was no longer enough to effect
change.^[1](#fn:*)^

Of course, the modern transparency movement is very different from the
Good Government movement of old. But the story illustrates that we
should be wary of kind nonprofits promising to help. I want to focus on
one particular strain of transparency thinking and show how it can go
awry. It starts with something that’s hard to disagree with.

Sharing Documents with the Public
---------------------------------

Modern society is made of bureaucracies and modern bureaucracies run on
paper: memos, reports, forms, filings. Sharing these internal documents
with the public seems obviously good, and indeed, much good has come out
of publishing these documents, whether it’s the [National Security
Archive](http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/), whose Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA) requests have revealed decades of government wrongdoing
around the globe, or the indefatigable [Carl Malamud and his
scanning](http://public.resource.org/), which has put terabytes of
useful government documents, from laws to movies, online for everyone to
access freely.

I suspect few people would put “publishing government documents on the
Web” high on their list of political priorities, but it’s a fairly cheap
project (just throw piles of stuff into scanners) and doesn’t seem to
have much downside. The biggest concern—privacy—seems mostly taken care
of. In the United States, FOIA and the Privacy Act (PA) provide fairly
clear guidelines for how to ensure disclosure while protecting people’s
privacy.

Perhaps even more useful than putting government documents online would
be providing access to corporate and nonprofit records. A lot of
political action takes place outside the formal government, and thus
outside the scope of the existing FOIA laws. But such things seem
totally off the radar of most transparency activists; instead, giant
corporations that receive billions of dollars from the government are
kept impenetrably secret.

Generating Databases for the Public
-----------------------------------

Many policy questions are a battle of competing interests—drivers don’t
want cars that roll over and kill them when they make a turn, but car
companies want to keep selling such cars. If you’re a member of
Congress, choosing between them is difficult. On the one hand are your
constituents, who vote for you. But on the other hand are big
corporations, which fund your reelection campaigns. You really can’t
afford to offend either one too badly.

So, there’s a tendency for Congress to try a compromise. That’s what
happened with, for example, the Transportation Recall Enhancement,
Accountability, and Documentation (TREAD) Act. Instead of requiring
safer cars, Congress simply required car companies to report how likely
their cars were to roll over. Transparency wins again!

Or, for a more famous example: after Watergate, people were upset about
politicians receiving millions of dollars from large corporations. But,
on the other hand, corporations seem to like paying off politicians. So
instead of banning the practice, Congress simply required that
politicians keep track of everyone who gives them money and file a
report on it for public inspection.

I find such practices ridiculous. When you create a regulatory agency,
you put together a group of people whose job is to solve some problem.
They’re given the power to investigate who’s breaking the law and the
authority to punish them. Transparency, on the other hand, simply shifts
the work from the government to the average citizen, who has neither the
time nor the ability to investigate these questions in any detail, let
alone do anything about it. It’s a farce: a way for Congress to look
like it has done something on some pressing issue without actually
endangering its corporate sponsors.

Interpreting Databases for the Public
-------------------------------------

Here’s where the technologists step in. “Something is too hard for
people?” they hear. “We know how to fix that.” So they download a copy
of the database and pretty it up for public consumption—generating
summary statistics, putting nice pictures around it, and giving it a
snazzy search feature and some visualizations. Now inquiring citizen can
find out who’s funding their politicians and how dangerous their cars
are just by going online.

The wonks love this. Still stinging from recent bouts of deregulation
and antigovernment zealotry, many are now skeptical about government.
“We can’t trust the regulators,” they say. “We need to be able to
investigate the data for ourselves.” Technology seems to provide the
perfect solution. Just put it all online—people can go through the data
while trusting no one.

There’s just one problem: if you can’t trust the regulators, what makes
you think you can trust the data?

The problem with generating databases isn’t that they’re too hard to
read; it’s the lack of investigation and enforcement power, and websites
do nothing to help with that. Since no one’s in charge of verifying
them, most of the things reported in transparency databases are simply
lies. Sometimes they’re blatant lies, like how some factories keep two
sets of books on workplace injuries: one accurate one, reporting every
injury, and one to show the government, reporting just 10% of
them.^[2](#fn:dagger)^ But they can easily be subtler: forms are
misfiled or filled with typos, or the malfeasance is changed in such a
way that it no longer appears on the form. Making these databases easier
to read results only in easier-to-read lies.

Three examples:

-   Congress’s operations are supposedly open to the public, but if you
    visit the House floor (or if you follow what they’re up to on one of
    these transparency sites) you find that they appear to spend all
    their time naming post offices. All the real work is passed using
    emergency provisions and is tucked into subsections of innocuous
    bills. (The bank bailouts were put in the Paul Wellstone Mental
    Health Act.) Matt Taibbi’s [*The Great
    Derangement*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/038552062X) tells the
    story.

-   Many of these sites tell you who your elected official is, but what
    impact does your elected official really have? For 40 years, people
    in New York thought they were governed by their elected
    officials—their city council, their mayor, their governor. But as
    Robert Caro revealed in [*The Power
    Broker*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245), they were all
    wrong. Power in New York was controlled by one man, a man who had
    consistently lost every time he’d tried to run for office, a man
    nobody thought of as being in charge at all: Parks Commissioner
    Robert Moses.

-   Plenty of sites on the Internet will tell you who your
    representative receives money from, but disclosed contributions are
    just the tip of the iceberg. As Ken Silverstein points out in [his
    series of pieces for
    Harper’s](http://www.harpers.org/subjects/KenSilverstein) (some of
    which he covers in his book
    [*Turkmeniscam*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140006743X)), being a
    member of Congress provides for endless ways to get perks and cash
    while hiding where it comes from.

Fans of transparency try to skirt around this. “OK,” they say, “but
surely *some* of the data will be accurate. And even if it isn’t, won’t
we learn something from how people lie?” Perhaps that’s true, although
it’s hard to think of any good examples. (In fact, it’s hard to think of
any good examples of transparency work accomplishing anything, except
perhaps for more transparency.) But everything has a cost.

Hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent funding transparency
projects around the globe. That money doesn’t come from the sky. The
question isn’t whether some transparency is better than none; it’s
whether transparency is really the best way to spend these resources,
whether they would have a bigger impact if spent someplace else.

I tend to think they would. All this money has been spent with the goal
of getting a straight answer, not of doing anything about it. Without
enforcement power, the most readable database in the world won’t
accomplish much—even if it’s perfectly accurate. So people go online and
see that all cars are dangerous and that all politicians are corrupt.
What are they supposed to do then?

Sure, perhaps they can make small changes—this politician gets slightly
less oil money than that one, so I’ll vote for her (on the other hand,
maybe she’s just a better liar and gets her oil money funneled through
PACs or foundations or lobbyists)—but unlike the government, they can’t
solve the bigger issue: a bunch of people reading a website can’t force
car companies to make a safe car. You’ve done nothing to solve the real
problem; you’ve only made it seem more hopeless: all politicians are
corrupt, all cars are dangerous. What can you do?

An Alternative
--------------

What’s ironic is that the Internet does provide something you can do. It
has made it vastly easier, easier than ever before, to form groups with
people and work together on common tasks. And it’s through people coming
together—not websites analyzing data—that real political progress can be
made.

So far we’ve seen baby steps—people copying what they see elsewhere and
trying to apply it to politics. Wikis seem to work well, so you build a
political wiki. Everyone loves social networks, so you build a political
social network. But these tools worked in their original setting because
they were trying to solve particular problems, not because they’re
magic. To make progress in politics, we need to think best about how to
solve its problems, not simply copy technologies that have worked in
other fields. Data analysis can be part of it, but it’s part of a bigger
picture. Imagine a team of people coming together to tackle some issue
they care about—food safety, say. You can have technologists poring
through safety records, investigative reporters making phone calls and
sneaking into buildings, lawyers subpoenaing documents and filing
lawsuits, political organizers building support for the project and
coordinating volunteers, members of Congress pushing for hearings on
your issues and passing laws to address the problems you uncover, and,
of course, bloggers and writers to tell your stories as they unfold.

Imagine it: an investigative strike team, taking on an issue, uncovering
the truth, and pushing for reform. They’d use technology, of course, but
also politics and the law. At best, a transparency law gets you one more
database you can look at. But a lawsuit (or congressional
investigation)? You get to subpoena all the databases, as well as the
source records behind them, then interview people under oath about what
it all means. You get to ask for what you need, instead of trying to
predict what you may someday want.

This is where data analysis can be really useful. Not in providing
definitive answers over the Web to random surfers, but in finding
anomalies and patterns and questions that can be seized upon and
investigated by others. Not in building finished products, but by
engaging in a process of discovery. But this can be done only when
members of this investigative strike team work in association with
others. They would do what it takes to accomplish their goals, not be
hamstrung by arbitrary divisions between “technology” and “journalism”
and “politics.”

Right now, technologists insist that they’re building neutral platforms
for anyone to find data on any issue. Journalists insist that they’re
objective observers of the facts. And political types assume they
already know the answers and don’t need to investigate further
questions. They’re each in their own silo, unable to see the bigger
picture.

I certainly was. I care passionately about these issues—I don’t want
politicians to be corrupt; I don’t want cars to kill people—and as a
technologist I’d love to be able to solve them. That’s why I got swept
up in the promise of transparency. It seemed like just by doing the
things I knew how to do best—write code, sift through databases—I could
change the world.

But it just doesn’t work. Putting databases online isn’t a silver
bullet, as nice as the word *transparency* may sound. But it was easy to
delude myself. All I had to do was keep putting things online and
someone somewhere would find a use for them. After all, that’s what
technologists do, right? The World Wide Web wasn’t designed for
publishing the news—it was designed as a neutral platform that could
support anything from scientific publications to pornography.

Politics doesn’t work like that. Perhaps at some point putting things on
the front page of the *New York Times* guaranteed that they would be
fixed, but that day is long past. The pipeline of leak to investigation
to revelation to report to reform has broken down. Technologists can’t
depend on journalists to use their stuff; journalists can’t depend on
political activists to fix the problems they uncover. Change doesn’t
come from thousands of people, all going their separate ways. Change
requires bringing people together to work on a common goal. That’s hard
for technologists to do by themselves.

But if they do take that as their goal, they can apply all their talent
and ingenuity to the problem. They can measure their success by the
number of lives that have been improved by the changes they fought for,
rather than the number of people who have visited their website. They
can learn which technologies actually make a difference and which ones
are merely indulgences. And they can iterate, improve, and scale.

Transparency can be a powerful thing, but not in isolation. So, let’s
stop passing the buck by saying our job is just to get the data out
there and it’s other people’s job to figure out how to use it. Let’s
decide that our job is to fight for good in the world. I’d love to see
all these amazing resources go to work on *that*.

*Thanks to Andy Oram and Andy Eggers for their insightful comments on
earlier versions of this essay.*

* * * * *

1.  For more, see
    [http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html). [↩](#fnref:*)

2.  *Fast Food Nation*, Eric Schlosser, Houghton Mifflin, 2001. [p.
    180] [↩](#fnref:dagger)




HOWTO: Lose weight
==================

March 1, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/loseweight)

* * * * *

The standard advice for losing weight is to eat less and exercise.

Exercise is almost worthless as a weight-loss strategy: the number of
calories you burn through exercise is miniscule and typically more than
made up by your instinct to eat a little extra after exercising.
Increased exercise is a *consequence* of losing weight, not a cause —
when you lose weight you will have more energy and it will be easier to
move, so you will then exercise. You have to lose weight first.

That leaves eating less. I have found three strategies to be effective
here:

1.  **Get rid of all snacks.** It used to be when I was hungry, I’d just
    grab a snack from the kitchen. It got so I basically did this
    without thinking and, as a result, I ended up eating a lot of
    snacks. Now the only food I have is unprepared; if I want to eat, I
    have to consider it and take the time to actually cook something or
    travel to someplace that sells prepared food.

2.  **Drink more water.** There are [lots of
    reasons](http://www.shapeupshop.com/weightloss/water-weight-loss.html)
    to drink more water, but it’s also a great way to lose weight. A lot
    of what feels like hunger is actually thirst, while having water in
    your stomach seems to counteract certain feelings of hunger.
    Furthermore, burning fat requires extra water.

3.  **Don’t be afraid to be hungry.** This is no doubt my most
    controversial tactic, but I do tend to think the body has a “set
    point” for the number of calories it’s used to consuming. Lowering
    that set point may mean ignoring a bout of hunger or two and
    possibly even going a whole day without eating. But after that, your
    body gets full after eating much less. Again: I’m not saying more
    than a day — this isn’t anorexia — but a one-day fast is far from
    unheard of.

    This may be easier for me since I almost always eat meals alone,
    making it no big deal if I skip them. People who eat meals with
    others may need to get used to only eating a side dish or just
    nibbling at their order.

Losing weight has been better than I ever imagined. Not only am I
dramatically thinner, but I have more energy, I waste less time eating,
and I now like the way I look. I’m much more flexible and mobile and,
most incredibly, I’ve gotten taller — this at the age of 23. (A lot of
people are skeptical that I’ve actually grown taller, but the changes
are measurable and dramatic and come with all the symptoms of height
growth I remember from my childhood (including the strange urge to
stretch vertically on a regular basis). I suppose it’s possible the
height difference simply results from better posture, but that seems
worth counting.)

I do not propose a new diet or some new theory. These are very simple
commonsense tips: remove temptation, get enough water, remove
obligation. But I’ve found they’ve been enough for me to lose dramatic
amounts of weight. I used to be embarrassingly chubby, now people worry
I have anorexia.


HOWTO: Read more books
======================

I’ve read [a hundred books a
year](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2009) for the past couple
years. Last time I mentioned this, a couple people asked how I could
read so many books. Do I read unusually quickly? Do I spend an unusual
amount of time reading? I did a simple calculation: The average person
spends 1704 hours a year watching TV. If the average reading rate is 250
words per minute and the average book is 180,000 words, then that’s 142
books a year. To my surprise, I wasn’t reading nearly enough books. So
I’ve taken some steps to read more:

1.  **Block your favorite blogs.** I definitely have the mental habit
    [noted in this xkcd cartoon](http://xkcd.com/477/): at the first
    sign of mental difficulty, I tab to a different window and begin
    typing the URL of a favorite blog. This habit is purely automatic, I
    do it without even thinking about it. As a result, I spend many,
    many hours a day reading blogs and following their links.

    To overcome this habit, I added all my favorite blogs to an
    `/etc/hosts` file that redirects them to a bogus IP. Now when I type
    their URLs, I get an error message. I did the same with Hulu and
    other sites I use to watch TV shows; if you have a real television,
    be sure to get rid of it too. Now I usually try visiting a couple
    different blogs before my conscious self realizes what’s happening,
    but this happens soon enough and, over the past couple weeks, I’ve
    managed to pretty much train myself out of this bad habit.

    Now I either focus on the problem at hand or think enough about it
    to take a break and go for a walk, eat something, drink some water,
    read a book, or take a nap.

2.  **Order lots of books at the library.** Most people think the way
    you read more books is by spending more time reading. But I’ve found
    that, [like exercise](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/loseweight),
    this is an effect and not a cause. I spend time reading when I have
    a great book to read. When I don’t, I feel no urge to read and when
    I do start reading something, I put it down quickly. But if I’m
    reading a great book, I spontaneously come up with times and places
    to read it.

    But figuring out which books are great in advance is hard. People’s
    experiences about which books they find compelling depend somewhat
    on their interests and finding accurate critics is problematic. So
    the best way I’ve found to see whether a book is good is to just
    start reading it.

    My local library system ([Minuteman](http://www.mln.lib.ma.us/))
    allows you to request up to 20 books online and then delivers them
    to the branch library nearest you. So whenever someone makes a book
    recommendation or I hear about a book that seems interesting, I
    request it online. Then I go and pick up a stack of books at the
    library every week or so.

    I begin reading them and finish the ones that are exciting enough to
    finish and return the ones that are unpromising enough to give up
    on. Then I return them all and get some more.

    I also find that the due dates and the growing pile of books
    provides additional impetus to read them. And the habit doesn’t cost
    me any money this way, so I don’t feel guilty about it. (I’m sure
    you can come up with reasons I should feel guilty, but the fact
    remains that I don’t.)

3.  **Alienate everyone close to you.** The biggest consumer of time is
    undoubtedly other people, in large measure because talking to other
    people is so fun that you don’t notice time going by. By keeping
    yourself away from other people (living alone is a good start), you
    free up an enormous amount of time for reading. I find this is
    particularly useful in reading books, since books can usually
    substitute for human company: you can take them with you on the
    train and to meals and curl up with them at night and so on.

    Getting rid of other hobbies no doubt also helps. (And, unlike
    people, books don’t encourage you to have other hobbies.) I didn’t
    have any other hobbies, so this was less of a problem for me, but
    you may want to think about the things you do instead of reading
    books and stop doing them.

4.  **Keep the temperature low.** A common problem is falling asleep
    while reading. But I find it’s difficult to fall asleep when I’m
    cold (whereas it’s very easy to sleep when I’m warm), so I keep the
    temperature quite low in my apartment during the day. Even when I’m
    snuggled up in bed, I’m usually cold enough that I can’t fall
    asleep.

I suspect few people will take all of this advice, but hopefully some of
it is useful to you.


On DIRFAs
=========

March 4, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dirfas)

* * * * *

You are traveling in a strange and foreign country, where you don’t
speak the language, when you run into a friendly old man who gestures
for you to follow him back to his hut. There he offers you the choice of
one of two different kinds of soup that a woman in the kitchen (his
wife, you presume) has made. You choose one and he pours you a bowl. It
is delicious and you eat the whole thing before bowing deeply and
heading for the door. But he blocks you and stares you down. You’re
puzzled; what does he want? He removes a coin from his pocket and begins
fingering it. He gestures to your own pocket.

You look around and realize you were quite mistaken. This was not a
friendly old man inviting you back to his house for supper — this is a
barker attracting customers to his restaurant! And now, of course, he
wants you to pay.

Now you may pay — perhaps because you feel bad for the old man and woman
and don’t want them to be out money on your account, or perhaps because
you’ve just noticed the menacing broad-shouldered fellow in the corner
with a club — but either way, you pay out of some personal desire: a
desire to help the couple, or avoid the club.

Upon return to the States, you relax from your stressful journey by
heading to your favorite restaurant. The waiter brings you a menu
listing the various options (it is a classy place, so no prices are
marked) and you say that you would prefer one. The waiter eventually
returns with it, you eat it, and it’s delicious.

Now the situation, despite seeming very similar, is somehow entirely
different. You feel an obligation to stay and pay the bill. Not simply
because you don’t want to get arrested, or because you want to be able
to return to the restaurant later. You have a reason to pay the bill
independent of any of your own desires. You must pay the bill because,
by sitting down and ordering, you promised you would.

One cannot accidentally promise, which is why the promise didn’t exist
in the foreign country, but you knew full well that ordering at the
restaurant in the States was a promise to pay full price at the end of
the meal. And by promising, you have created a desire-independent reason
for action, or, as I put it, a DIRFA.

DIRFAs are surely the most amazing and confounding of all of Searle’s
discoveries. It seems crazy to think that there can be some magical
realm, independent of any individual human desire, to which we can be
called to account. And yet, there it is. We pay at the restaurant not
because we want to, or because we want to help certain others, but
because we have committed to doing so and that commitment somehow binds
us.

In his new book, *Making the Social World*, Searle shows that, contrary
to appearances, DIRFAs (like all social institutions) are merely an
outgrowth of language. This is an incredible claim, but Searle makes a
convincing case.

Imagine saying, “Barack Obama is president of the United States.” A
simple, unexceptional act. But simply by doing it, you have entered into
a whole series of social commitments. You have committed that you
believe it. If you said it and did not believe it, people could rightly
criticize you for lying. And your belief commits you to its truth; if it
turned out to be false, people could criticize you for being wrong. You
also commit yourself to communicating this belief; if you mumbled and
your audience misheard you, you could be criticized for being unclear.
If you were speaking to someone who had a friend named Barack Obama and
did not know of the other man with the same name who is currently the US
President, you could be criticized for being confusing.

A simple statement — the physical act consisting of a few vocal cord
vibrations and associated lip movements — has pulled you into a whole
web of social attachments and commitments. To communicate presupposes a
whole system of social ontology.

It is difficult to overstate the implications. Much of political thought
is about why people participate in institutions that do not benefit
them. Why don’t the workers rise up and overthrow capitalism if all they
have to lose are their chains? Is it because hegemony has persuaded them
that the existing order is just and natural? Searle lays the foundations
for a much simpler solution.

Kaczynski argued that the left was the result of oversocialization.
Leftists took the social constraints they were taught — don’t
discriminate on the basis of race, for example — so strongly that they
begin applying them much more widely than the others around them. But
Searle shows how this is a necessary outgrowth of empathy, the left’s
defining traits: social institutions are grounded in a form of
collective intentionality, where others count upon you to obey the
institutional rules. Someone who can better imagine others’ minds must
feel this network of expectations on them to be especially strong.

This book feels like Searle’s last book. It weaves together the entire
scope of his career — from speech acts, to consciousness, to politics —
in a single, stunning answer to this most vexing question: how can we
mere sacks of meat, through brute physical acts, create constructions
(like promises, or money, or corporations) that can then turn around and
bind us. How glorious to see an entire lifetime of work coming together
to answer this question at last.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195396170)



Philosophical Puzzles Resolved
==============================

March 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/unpuzzled)

* * * * *

Puzzle 1: Equality and Disability
---------------------------------

Daniel Wikler posed to me the following problem he encountered while
Staff Ethicist at the WHO.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ The WHO recommends two
principles: first, treat all citizens equally; second, aim to maximize
overall quality of life. But imagine two citizens will die without a
kidney transplant, one of whom is seriously disabled, but there is only
one kidney. The first principle requires that both have an equal chance
of getting the kidney. But the second principle requires we give it to
the non-disabled person: if the disabled person dies, overall quality of
life in the society will be higher, since it will have one less disabled
person. (We accept, by definition, that disability lowers quality of
life.) What to do?

*Response:* It seems pretty clear that the first value is simply wrong.
We have no interest in promoting the health of the population; the
population is simply an abstraction. Our interest is in promoting the
health of (the sum of) individual people, who are conscious and
therefore have moral interests.

One can see this clearly by looking at the cases where the population
changes but people do not: birth, death, exile, and immigration:

**Birth:** The society has a controlled population growth program and
assigns birth permits; birth permits are assigned to parents with the
healthiest genes.

**Death:** The society has a limited number of organs; organs are given
to the least-injured.

**Exile:** Sick people are tossed out of the society.

**Immigration:** Only healthy people are allowed to immigrate.

In all four such cases, it seems pretty clear to me that the population
health position is wrong. (Exile seems particularly cruel.)

Puzzle 2: The Repugnant Conclusion
----------------------------------

Derek Parfit [poses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mere_addition_paradox)
the following problem. 1: Imagine there are a group of happy people (A).
2: Now imagine that some other people are created in some other
completely unconnected place that are happy, but less happy than the
previous group (B). 3: Now imagine that both groups are adjusted to be
at some equal, but intermediate point of happiness between A and A+. 4:
Now imagine these two societies are connected, resulting in C: more
people at a lesser degree of happiness.

2 is no worse than 1, since the additional people are happy and do not
affect anyone. 3 is no worse than 2, since the people in B are made
happier by more than the people in A are made unhappy. 4 is no worse
than 3, since we are simply introducing folks to each other. But
continue this and you reach the repugnant conclusion: a huge swarm of
people who are just barely happy is better than a handful of people who
are extremely happy.

*Response:* The problem is step 2, which is in fact worse than 1. Parfit
assumes that simply adding extra people whose lives are worth living
cannot make things worse. But that’s ridiculous. Imagine our society,
then imagine our society with a bunch more feral people living on the
huge island of garbage in the middle of the Pacific, unable to speak
except in a growl, with none of the surrounding societies ever noticing.
I think the people living in the garbage heap’s lives would be worth
living (I wouldn’t want to kill them, nor would they want to be killed),
but I distinctly prefer the former society.

Puzzle 3: The Logic of the Larder
---------------------------------

Many people say that we shouldn’t eat animals, because that would mean
killing them. But for many of these animals, if they aren’t going to be
killed and eaten, they would never be born in the first place. What if
the animal preferred to have a short, pleasant existence before being
consumed as food rather than having no existence at all? Wouldn’t that
mean we should breed the animal, give it a nice life, then kill and eat
it?

*Response:* This is a ridiculous hypothetical — you’re suggesting an
animal that doesn’t exist yet has a preference about existing. I don’t
respect hypothetical creatures’ hypothetical desires to not be
hypothetical. If I did, you could get me to do all sorts of absurd
things just by hypothesizing them. You could, say, simply hypothesize a
utility monster’s very strong desire to exist and I would be morally
bound to try to create one. Or perhaps my hypothetical children really
want to exist, so I have to hurry to procreate. That’s ridiculous.

I think we should maximize the actual interests of actual people.

Puzzle 4: Addition vs. Subtraction
----------------------------------

As a consequentialist, if I support not adding people (as I do in my
resolution to 2 and 3), then I must support removing people, since the
consequences are identical. If I prefer a society with fewer, happier
people, then I must support euthanizing some people to make the rest
better off. Sure, there are practical questions with implementing this,
but philosophically, I must be in favor of eliminationism.

*Response:* I am not a consequentialist about societies, I’m a
utilitarian: I think we should work toward outcomes that maximize the
interests of individuals.

There’s a fundamental disanalogy between addition and contraction.
Addition means creating new people with interests that didn’t exist
before the addition. Contraction, on the other hand, means getting rid
of actually-existing people. I do not respect the hypothetical interests
of hypothetical individuals to not be hypothetical, but I do respect
real people with real interests right now, who presumably have an
interest in not being gotten rid of. Thus, I support not getting rid of
people and not arbitrarily creating new ones.

* * * * *

1.  The problem is also discussed in F.M. Kamm, “[Disability,
    Discrimination, and Irrelevant
    Goods](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=8494272529527506736)“ [↩](#fnref:fn1)




Theory of Change
================

March 14, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theoryofchange)

* * * * *

I am increasingly convinced that the difference between effective and
ineffective people is their skill at developing a theory of change.
Theory of change is a funny phrase — I first heard it in the nonprofit
community, but it’s also widespread in politics and really applies to
just about everything. Unfortunately, very few people seem to be very
good at it.

Let’s take a concrete example. Imagine you want to decrease the size of
the defense budget. The typical way you might approach this is to look
around at the things you know how to do and do them on the issue of
decreasing the defense budget. So, if you have a blog, you might write a
blog post about why the defense budget should be decreased and tell your
friends about it on Facebook and Twitter. If you’re a professional
writer, you might write a book on the subject. If you’re an academic,
you might publish some papers. Let’s call this strategy a “theory of
action”: you work *forwards* from what you know how to do to try to find
things you can do that will accomplish your goal.

A theory of change is the opposite of a theory of action — it works
backwards from the goal, in concrete steps, to figure out what you can
do to achieve it. To develop a theory of change, you need to start at
the end and repeatedly ask yourself, “Concretely, how does one achieve
that?” A decrease in the defense budget: how does one achieve that? Yes,
you.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Congress passes a new budget with a smaller
authorization for defense next year.

Yes, that’s true — but let’s get more concrete. How does that happen?

AUDIENCE: Uh, you get a majority of the House and Senate to vote for it
and the President to sign it.

Great, great — so how do you get them to do that? Now we have to think
about what motivates politicians to support something. This is a really
tricky question, but it’s totally crucial if we want to be effective.
After all, if we don’t eventually motivate the politicians, then what
we’ve done is useless for achieving our goal. (Unless we can think of
some other way to shrink the defense budget.)

But this is also not an insoluble problem. Put yourself in the shoes of
a politician for a moment. What would motivate you? Well, on the one
hand, there’s what you think is right. Then there’s what will help you
get reelected. And finally there’s peer pressure and other sort of
psychological motivations that get people to do things that don’t meet
their own goals.

So the first would suggest a strategy of persuading politicians that
cutting the defense budget was a good idea. The second would suggest
organizing a constituency in their districts that would demand they cut
the defense budget. And maybe one of you can figure out how to use the
third—that’s a little trickier.

But let’s stick with the first, since that’s the most standard. What
convinces politicians that something is the right thing to do?

AUDIENCE: Their beliefs?

In a sense, I suppose. But those are going to be pretty hard to change.
I’m thinking more, if you have a politician with a given set of beliefs,
how do you convince them that cutting the defense budget advances those
beliefs?

AUDIENCE: You outline why to them.

Well, OK, let’s think about that. Do you think if you ran into Nancy
Pelosi in the hallway here and you tried to explain to her why cutting
the defense budget would accomplish her beliefs, that you’d convince
her?

AUDIENCE: Probably not.

Why not?

AUDIENCE: Because she wouldn’t really listen to me — she’d just smile
and nod.

Yeah. Nancy Pelosi doesn’t trust you. She’s never met you. You’re not
particularly credible. So you need to find people the politicians trust
and get them to convince the politicians.

Alright, well, we can continue down this road for a while — figuring out
who politicians trust, figuring out how to persuade *them*, figuring out
how to get them to, in turn, persuade the politicians, etc. Then, when
the politicians are persuaded, there’s the task of developing something
they can vote for, getting it introduced so they can vote on it, then
getting them to vote on the specific measure even when they agree with
the overall idea. You can see that this can take quite a while.

It’s not easy. It could take a while before you get to a concrete action
that you can take. But do you see how this is entirely crucial if you
want to be effective? Now maybe if you’re only writing a blog post, it’s
not worth it. Not everything we do has to be maximally effective. But DC
is filled with organizations that spend millions of dollars each year
and have hardly even begun to think about these questions. I’m not
saying their money is totally wasted — it certainly has some positive
impacts — but it could do so much more if the people in charge thought,
concretely, about how it was supposed to accomplish their goals.

I’ll close with one more example, showing how this strategy can be used
personally as well. I was at a party once and I told someone I was
writing a book and that I wanted it to be a bestseller. They laughed at
that and I think it’s because they had a theory of action model in their
head: you write the best book you can, and of course you want it to be a
bestseller, but either it does or it doesn’t.

But I was working backwards, I had a theory of change: I asked, What
makes something a best seller? Well, lots of people buy it. OK, how do
you get lots of people to buy something? Well, you have to persuade them
it’s something they want. OK, how do you persuade them it’s something
they want? Well, first it has to meet some desire or need they have and
second you need to explain to them how it meets that need. So what are
the desires or needs people have? (Looking at bestsellers:
entertainment, escape, self-improvement, etc.) What are the ways of
explaining your book meets their need? (Being popular early on,
appearances in the media, persuading readers to tell other readers,
etc.)

Again, we can keep going for quite a while until we get all the way back
to something I can actually do. But because of this, I didn’t have to
simply have to hope that my book became a bestseller, like every other
author. I could actually do something about it.

That’s the power of a theory of change.


The Reason So Many People Are Unemployed
========================================

March 14, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whynojobs)

* * * * *

Around the time of the Great Depression, a man named John Maynard Keynes
made an incredible discovery. The reason so many people were out of work
was not really because of irresponsible banks or high taxes or reckless
government policy. It was really much simpler than all that: there
wasn’t enough money.

Now, as individuals, we’d all like a little more money for ourselves.
But pause for a moment and think about what it means if there isn’t
enough money in the economy as a *whole*. A good way to wrap your head
around this is to think about a much smaller case: instead of the whole
economy, let’s think about a now-famous babysitting co-op on Capitol
Hill. Instead of dollars, the co-op used its own scrip that was worth an
hour of babysitting time. When you wanted to go out, you’d pay a couple
hours to someone else to watch your kids; then when they wanted to go
out, they’d pay you or someone else to do the same for them.

It all worked great for a while, until one day they found they had too
few pieces of scrip. Every couple had only a couple hours left and,
having so little, they didn’t want to waste it. So they all decided to
save it for a very special occasion. This was kind of an incredible
situation — even though there were people who wanted someone to babysit
their kids, and people who were willing to do just that, the deal didn’t
happen, simply because the co-op hadn’t printed enough colored pieces of
paper. Eventually the co-op learned their mistake, printed some more
scrip and handed it out, and everybody went back to babysitting like
before and were much happier for it.

The same thing happens in the real economy. When there aren’t enough
green-colored pieces of paper around, everybody gets worried and holds
on to the little they have. Even if you’d like someone to build an
extension on your house, and there’s someone else out there who’d like
to build an extension on your house, the deal doesn’t happen, just
because you don’t have enough green pieces of paper (or, more
realistically, dollars in your bank account). This is a total waste. You
don’t get the extension and the other guy doesn’t get a job, all because
we haven’t run the printing presses enough (or added enough zeroes to
the bank’s computers).

Before the Great Depression, most countries wouldn’t simply print more
colored pieces of paper. They were on the “gold standard” and they would
only print more currency when more gold was discovered. This led to the
most bizarre series of booms and busts as more gold was discovered in
strange places and then “used up” by population growth or other things.
After Keynes, countries eventually stopped this silliness and just
started printing their money directly. [As soon as they abandoned the
gold
standard](http://phoenixwoman.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/delong-march2009.jpg),
they begun recovering from the Great Depression.

But the power to print more money is obviously a very special power and
you wouldn’t want it to fall into the wrong hands. So, in the United
States, we’ve taken it away from elected politicians and given it
(mostly) to the big banks. The banks select people to run their local
Federal Reserve and then some of those people (along with some
additional folks nominated by the President) are selected to be members
of a group called the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC,
essentially, decides how much money there should be in circulation,
which in turn decides how many people have jobs.

You might think this sounds crazy — a bunch of unelected bankers get to
decide how many people have jobs? — and, in fact, it is crazy. But I’m
not making it up. Ask a macroeconomist, like Paul Krugman, and this is
exactly what he’ll tell you. And if you look in the Federal Reserve Act
or on the Fed’s website, you’ll find their
[mission](http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm) is to
“promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and
moderate long-term interest rates.” These multiple goals are relatively
recent; before 1978, the goal was simply “maximum employment,
production, and purchasing power.”

Now some people will claim that the Federal Reserve has done all it can
to create more jobs but the recession is so deep this time that there’s
nothing else it can do. But that’s just not true — even the chairman of
the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, says it’s not true. He was asked
about this in a Senate hearing. As the *Economist* [summarized his
response](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2009/12/from_the_horses_mouth):
“Mr Bernanke does not want to risk a de-anchoring of inflation
expectations. He is willing to accept 10% or greater unemployment and
the resulting economic and political fall-out in order to avoid that
risk.”

Which brings us to the subject of inflation. Obviously if you print a
lot of new money, it makes existing money worth a little less. This is
annoying, but is it worse than having people out of work? Well, it
depends who you are. If you have a lot of money, you’re more worried
about it becoming worth less. But if you work for a living, you’re more
worried about people being out of work. As you might expect, Mr.
Bernanke has a lot of money, as do the other bankers on the committee
and the people who selected them. So they’ve decided to let millions and
millions of people be unemployed and the rest of us experience the
resulting recession rather than risk the chance that some of their money
might be worth a little less.

The biggest reason this is possible is because nobody realizes it. If it
was conventional wisdom that a bunch of unelected bankers looking out
for rich people were the reason everyone was out of work, politicians
would be forced to explain to angry voters why we had this crazy system
and might actually consider doing something about it. But, incredibly,
it just seems like nobody has any idea. Voters don’t realize it,
politicians don’t understand it, journalists don’t cover it. And, in
fact, they’re so far from having any idea that it’s really difficult to
explain it to them. When you say a bunch of unelected bankers are the
reason there are no jobs, they just look at you like you’re crazy. I’ve
just spent a page or two explaining it and you still probably think I’m
crazy. But it’s true! This isn’t some Ron Paul-type crackpot idea; this
is mainstream economics, from Paul Krugman to the head of George W.
Bush’s Council of Economic Advisors.

I feel a bit like the guy in one of those movies, going around and
telling everyone that the murderer is standing right over there — right
there, look! — but nobody believes him and people continue to die. It’s
incredibly frustrating, and I have no idea what to do about it.

One final point: How did we get into this mess in the first place? Why
did we suddenly find ourselves without enough money? Well, there was a
housing bubble: for many years, house prices kept going up and up for no
other reason than everyone was betting that they were just going to keep
going up. When house prices were unsustainably high, that was part of
the money in circulation. But when the music stopped and the bubble
popped, house prices cratered and nearly \$8 trillion disappeared
overnight. The government has printed a bunch of money since then, but
nowhere near the \$8 trillion we lost. Obviously a lot of other bad
stuff happened during the financial crisis, but this is the reason
everybody is out of work.


The Anti-Suit Movement
======================

March 16, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/antisuit)

* * * * *

I don’t like wearing suits. In part, this is simply a question of
personal taste — I find them uncomfortable and overpriced, and I don’t
like the way they look. But it’s also a question of principle. Suits —
and the other trappings of “respect” that go with them, like titles and
sir’s and the rest — are the physical evidence of [power
distance](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geert_Hofstede), the entrenchment
of a particular form of inequality.

As a result, when I go to events I try to avoid wearing a suit if I can.
But sometimes not wearing a suit just feels really out of place. When
you show up to a room of people in suits wearing a t-shirt and jeans,
people don’t think you’re taking a brave stand on principle; they just
think you’re unkempt.

Yet these things do change. In the 1950s, college kids went to class in
suits and addressed their professors as sir. The 1960s changed all that.
Today, at most colleges, wearing a suit to class would be the weird
thing to do.

This seems like a traditional collective action problem. If one person
doesn’t wear a suit, they seem weird, but if everyone doesn’t wear a
suit, they’re all fine. But the idea of doing political organizing
around not wearing a suit just seems bizarre. It’s hard to know who to
organize — each event has a different group of people — and even if you
could find the people and they agreed with you, asking folks to join a
no-suit pact just seems weird.

So suits are emblematic of this strange kind of politico-cultural issue
— a political question that’s not amenable to a political solution. And
yet, from the 1960s, we know that these battles can be won. Does anyone
know how?


A Reading Machine
=================

March 29, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/readingmachine)

* * * * *

One of the things that has long puzzled me is why children, who so
incredibly pick up spoken language without formal instruction, encounter
so much trouble when learning to read. Perhaps, I thought for a while,
it is because there is a “language organ” that has specifically evolved
to let them learn speech while reading has to be learned with more
general portions of the brain. But the more I learn about neurology, the
more ridiculous that seems.

In retrospect, the answer is rather obvious. Children learn a language
because they are surrounded by it. It’s unavoidable. Their world is full
of people speaking it and the pattern matchers in their brains go to
town, figuring out the structures underlying its grammar and associated
its vocabulary with the other things they see around them.

It’s impossible for there to be anything similar with words. Sure, some
words appear in fairly regular positions (MEN on bathroom doors,
perhaps) and children may learn to recognize them, but for the most part
words are rather avoidable and their patterns hard to spot. How are
children to draw a connection between the words in the newspaper and any
sentences that they can understand? The only clues are the pictures and
anyone who’s read picturebooks to a kid knows that kids make valiant use
of those few clues, but it’s simply not enough to let them learn to
read.

What’s needed is a way to give children the additional clues they
require, but at their own pace. An adult can read books but only reads
linearly and soon gets bored of reading the same thing over and over
again. (I’ve often thought that children were being stupid by reading
the same things over and over and over again. Now I realize I’m the
stupid one; it’s the kids who are being smart. Only through repetition
can your brain see the patterns!) It’s very difficult for children to
pick up a pattern under such conditions.

But devices never get tired, so I would propose a device. Here is what I
imagine: Give the child an iPad with a special program for reading
books. The program provides a selection of nice picture books with words
in large type underneath. Switching pages can be done the usual way;
kids seem pretty good at figuring out gestural interfaces. But the big
innovation is simply this: when you touch a word, it turns red while the
speakers say it out loud.

In this way, the child can have the machine read the book to them. Tap
the words in sequence and the book pronounces them. If a word is somehow
unclear, just tap it again. When you finish the page, just go to the
next one. When you finish a book, read another, or start over.

Soon, I imagine, the child will make some basic associations. They will
learn that tapping the word “the” makes the sound “thuh” and means
“the”. They will no longer need to tap it every time to find this out —
they can save time by saying it out loud themselves. Eventually, they
can just say it in their heads.

Pretty quickly, more and more common words can be handled this way. Then
the child begins noticing patterns between common words. All the words
beginning with k have a kuh sound! With such patterns recognized, some
words can be sounded out. Eventually, only strange words need to be
tapped — the rest the child can read by themselves.

People who have not spent much time around children might claim such a
device will make children lazy — why learn to read when a device will do
it for them? But children are desperate to read; those who cannot will
often try to memorize the shorter books their parents read to them so
they can pretend to read those books themselves. This device would
simply give them the tools they need. It would lead their brains to make
the same associations that the software makes occur physically: point at
this word, hear this sound. And there’s nothing are brains are better at
than recognizing such simple patterns and being able to predict them in
the future.

Perhaps this software already exists. If so, please tell me. If not, I’d
like to work with someone to make it. Will it work? There’s only one way
to find out, but I think it’s got a pretty good shot.


How to Get a Job Like Mine
==========================

April 7, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pcccjob)

* * * * *

[[Беларуская](http://pc.de/pages/pcccjob-be)]

Apparently a lot of people have gotten the mistaken impression from my
blog that I sit around and think about abstract philosophy all day.
Well, I guess I do kind of do that, but my day job is actually much more
exciting. I’m a cofounder of [the Progressive Change Campaign
Committee](http://boldprogressives.org/) (BoldProgressives.org) and I
spend my days experimenting with new ways to get progressive policies
enacted and progressive politicians elected.

Like a lot of people, I grew up feeling frustrated with the world —
extremes of wealth and poverty, insane and bloody wars, outdated
intellectual monopoly laws, big corporations run amok. But I had no idea
what to do about it. Writing just felt like preaching to the choir,
marching in the streets felt like the protest of the powerless, working
with people on the ground just didn’t seem to scale.

But when my friend Larry Lessig decided to run for Congress, I begun to
see that there was something I could do. During the short-lived
campaign, we were besieged with offers of help from consultants,
software companies, and services firms. Their technology was invariably
outdated and incompetent (the leading tools are built on SQL Server),
uncoordinated and poorly-designed. The advice they gave was horrendous,
their incompetence bordered on sabotage, and the prices they charged
would bankrupt us.

We started the Progressive Change Campaign Committee in January 2009
with the notion that we could fix all that. We would help filter the
good consultants from the bad, write up best practices and conduct
experiments to learn what works. Along the way, we got pulled into issue
campaigns as well — at first [going after CNBC for their terrible
coverage of the economic crisis](http://fixcnbc.com/), then spending
most of the last year [getting Congress to pass a public option in the
health care bill](http://whipcongress.com/). Along the way, we’ve gotten
over 400,000 members and raised over a million dollars for our various
tactics. Not bad for our first year!

But now, as the 2010 campaigns ramp up, we’re getting back to our
original mission. We’ve been working with campaigns to help them find
talented staff, competent consultants, and money-saving techniques. But
we also need some talented programmers to build the next generation of
campaign tools. We’ve got some really exciting ideas, but we need your
help.

So here’s the ask: **Want to work with me on building some amazing tools
for some amazing campaigns?** If so, just send me an email at
[aaron@boldprogressives.org](mailto:aaron@boldprogressives.org) or [just
fill out this
form](http://act.boldprogressives.org/cms/sign/app_senprogrammer/).

Then, tell your friends. Your country needs you.


That Sounds Smart
=================

June 18, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/soundsmart)

* * * * *

How do you tell if what someone is saying is smart? Most people’s first
instinct is to think that things they can’t understand must be smart.
After all, to say such things they must have learned them and aren’t
people who have learned more about something generally smarter than
people who haven’t? Thus the common phenomena of people trusting
jargon-laden statements.

One problem with this method is simply that jargon can be faked. It’s
not too hard to make up a bunch of longish words that sound complicated.
And if you don’t understand them, you’ll have a hard time telling
whether they’re real or made up.

But the more serious problem is that this method is exactly backwards.
Smart people actually say things that are very simple and easy to
understand. And the smarter they are, the more clear what they say is.
It’s stupid people who say things that are hard to understand.

Part of this is because stupid people say things that aren’t true,
things that aren’t true don’t make sense, and things that don’t make
sense are hard to understand. But you can also look at it from the other
end: if you genuinely understand something — really, truly understand it
— then it doesn’t seem complicated and you can explain it rather simply.

But the larger consequence is that if you’re smart the world doesn’t
seem very complicated. This might seem obvious, but the obvious thought
is rather different. The obvious thought is: The world doesn’t seem
complicated to smart people. But this isn’t what smart people actually
think. They think the world isn’t complicated, period.

This is because when they try to explain part of the world they
understand to someone, they explain it clearly, and, as a result, that
person now understands it. This is proof that it’s not just
uncomplicated for them, it’s uncomplicated for everyone.

But, I suspect, for most people the world is a strange and mysterious
place, governed by principles they do not understand, which affect them
severely but cannot be controlled, only coped with as best as possible.
This is certainly how most people regard their computers.

By contrast, when I listen to smart people some part of the world I only
dimly understood or never considered becomes immediately clear. Even if
I don’t agree, I never have any trouble understanding. Listening to
them, is like breathing pure oxygen and I cannot get enough.

This means the tradeoff between being expert and being popular doesn’t
actually exist. People who truly understand their subject should have no
trouble writing for a popular audience. And, in fact, their writing will
probably better than that of the professional popularizers.

A good example of this was the early days of the blog Freakonomics. It
had two writers, a successful economist and a popular journalist. The
two had worked together on the bestselling book of the same name, with
the general assumption that it was the journalist who had made the
economist’s work clear. But reading their individual posts on the blog,
you could see it was the reverse: the economist was a much clearer
writer than the journalist.

Another result is that you find the really smart things in unexpected
and undervalued places. Smart writing won’t be in formal and
difficult-to-understand journal articles, but in the profanity-laced
angry rants you’ll find on someone’s blog. That’s where the smart people
are, even if everybody else just thinks they’re dumb.


The Political Philosophy of Toy Story 3
=======================================

June 20, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toystory3pol)

* * * * *

[**SPOILER WARNING:** This is pretty much all spoilers, so please seem
the movie before reading. It’s a really, really good movie — probably
the best Disney film. So you should totally see it. First.]

**UPDATE:** I missed a bunch the first time I saw the movie; this
version has been amended to include the subthemes about immigration and
socialization.

The film begins with Woody trying to defend a crumbling system of
communism (presumably the Soviet Union). Toys have a duty to their
owners, he argues. The owner is a personified totalitarian state
(Stalin?) — he decides what the toys do and the toys are not permitted
to escape. For some reason (false consciousness?), the other toys
instinctively agree with this but find the notion hard to sustain when
their owner makes clear he doesn’t want them anymore (massive
unemployment).

The last straw is when, through a comic mishap, they get the
misimpression their owner is trying to throw them away. They feel this
existential threat releases them from their duty of
loyalty.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ The state’s one duty to its citizens is to keep
them alive; if it can’t do that, the system falls apart. Note, however,
that it’s only the misimpression that removes the duty. When they learn
(from Mrs. Potato Head) that they were mistaken and Andy only planned to
put them in the attic, they rush to return to him. The attic won’t
actually kill them and so doesn’t remove the duty.

Communism having collapsed, the toys emigrate to Sunnyside (the US, that
nation of immigrants), which leader Lotso depicts as a libertarian
paradise. In his introductory he speech, he touts the joys of
self-ownership and interacting with children through the market (new
children are constantly replacing old ones, maximizing the efficiency of
the toys), as well as the improved material comforts his system brings
(the repair depot, the dream house). The toys are enchanted.

However, they quickly realize libertarian paradise is actually a far
worse nightmare than communism. Lotso explains that immigrants have to
work their way up, starting by doing the painful, backbreaking jobs that
the current population (all former immigrants themselves) won’t do.
There are a couple exceptions: Barbie is taken as a (Russian) mail-order
bride and the entrepreneurial Buzz is chosen for promotion to the
managerial class and resocialized so he won’t sympathize with his old
comrades.^[2](#fn:fni)^

Sunnside’s supposed freedom is actually slavery, complete with military
discipline (via the reset Buzz) and a panopticon prison (via the monkey
and symbolized by the treehouse). Their days are spent in torturous
labor from which there is no real escape. Lotso has used his freedom to
accumulate all the power for himself and does not allow any for anyone
else.

Meanwhile, Woody is adopted by Bonnie’s benevolent dictatorship. People
are given a second chance there — they can adopt new names, new
identities, and spend their days doing improv. They do work under
Bonnie’s direction, but they do so voluntarily, and are free to leave if
she becomes a tyrant. As Andy makes clear at the end of the film, it is
Bonnie who owes a duty to the toys, not vice versa.

Back at Sunnyside, the toys overthrow Lotso’s capitalist domination by
working together, harnessing the collective power of the working class
and using the managerial class (i.e. Ken and Bookworm) against itself
(via deception and torture!). But their success eventually persuades
some members of the managerial class to become their allies (e.g. Ken,
despite having been tortured^[3](#fn:fn3)^, and ultimately Lotso’s
right-hand toy, Big Baby) and at a key moment they together overthrow
the capitalist Lotso, as Barbie gives a rousing speech nailing the key
flaw with libertarianism: “authority should derive from the consent of
the governed, not the threat of force.”

However, the new revolutionaries also leave, preventing them from
installing themselves as a new dictatorship of the proletariat. And in a
final act betraying that he is finally beginning to question communism,
Woody asks Andy (surely his first request of the state in his entire
life!) that his comrades be given to Bonnie. Andy agrees, and takes the
extra step of giving Woody to Bonnie as well, finally dissolving his
duties to the state.

Meanwhile, Ken and Barbie now lead Sunnyside, making it a “fun and
groovy” socialist utopia. (Its actual day-to-day operation is, of
course, left vague, but there is apparently lots of dancing in the
streets.) Having risen up and overthrown Lotso, the toys can now operate
on the basis of mutual equality. A happy ending for everyone.

* * * * *

1.  The same seems to apply to the Green Army Men who leave earlier, but
    only because they (pretty reasonably) believe they’re going to get
    thrown away even when other toys just go to the
    attic. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Very *Street Corner Society*, so another possible reading is that
    they’re fleeing fascist Italy. [↩](#fnref:fni)

3.  Perhaps Ken realizes that he will get to lead a Lotso-less
    Sunnsyside? [↩](#fnref:fn3)




Brought to You by the Letter S
==============================

June 21, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/proxyreform)

* * * * *

When you’re writing laws, changing the smallest details can have huge
effects. But I’ve never seen anything as big as what happened this week,
when the White House gutted an entire section of financial regulation by
removing the letter `s`.

Right now, shareholders of big companies vote to decide who will be on
the board of directors by filling out a mail-in ballot called a proxy
card. But currently the corporation’s CEO gets to decide who’s on the
card! The result is a board hand-picked by the CEO — and they return the
favor by providing CEOs with exorbitant salaries.

The current financial regulation bill — in a provision passed by both
the House and Senate — would change that by allowing shareholders with
5% of the stock to come together and propose additional names for the
ballot. But the White House is trying to gut this proposal at the last
minute, and they’ve done it in an incredibly sneaky way — they removed
the letter `s` from the end of the word shareholders.

Now instead of shareholders whose stock adds up to 3% coming together,
you have to be a single shareholder with 5% of the stock all by
yourself. And for most big companies, there just isn’t anyone like that.
Take GE, for example — its biggest shareholder only owns about 3.4% of
the company.

So by removing a single letter, they managed to make this provision
completely useless.

The White House is being barraged by major CEOs begging them to keep
fighting for this provision — after all, no CEO wants to see their
lavish salaries cut! As Barney Frank put it, “I think there are some
people in the White House who think, ‘Well, we’re fighting the financial
institutions, but why fight with some of the others, you know, the other
corporations?’” Apparently they’re so scared of a fight, they’re willing
to gut a provision passed by both the House and Senate.

If you’re interested in fighting for real corporate reform, please sign
our petition to the White House:

> “Stop lobbying against shareholder power in corporate decision-making
> — and against protections that would finally rein in CEO pay. That’s
> not change we can believe in.”

**Add your name:**

Sign

first name

last name

email

zip


Management, Organizing, Mobilizing
==================================

June 29, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/deforganizing)

* * * * *

*Management* is art of getting people who work for you to accomplish
things. It’s a subtle and fascinating art, the applied version of my
great intellectual love, sociology. It’s usually practiced badly, but
even when done badly it can accomplish incredible things. One person can
only do so much on their own—their time, their powers, their creativity
are all limited. But even an incompetent manager, who uses only a
fraction of the powers of her employees, is capable of accomplishing
tasks far beyond the range of any single person.

*Organizing* is the art of getting people who don’t work for you to
accomplish things. Many of the underlying concepts are the same but the
execution is vastly more difficult. You don’t really get to pick your
people. The people you get don’t simply follow instructions, they must
be persuaded and cajoled and made to understand your vision. But when it
works, they accomplish great things you never would have allowed them to
try.

Organizing has many forms. The obvious one is where you take a batch of
volunteers and try to shape them into a manageable force. The best are
selected, developed, promoted, and taught to do the same. It is like
traditional management in reverse: instead of starting with the top of a
hierarchy and building down through hiring, you start with a bunch of
people at the bottom and try to build them up through training and
promotion.

But organizing also means finding other leaders, people embedded in
management structures (organizations) of their own, and using them
toward a common goal. Sometimes this means explicit direction of their
efforts, as in a coalition, where you get the heads of various groups to
all work on a common project, or sometimes it’s simply having them lend
their name or knowledge to the cause. A great organizer of this sort
develops rich networks they can quickly call upon in need. (Journalists
can be good organizers in this sense, developing connections with
sources and experts they can leverage to create a story.)

Organizing is most prevalent in my own field of politics, where the work
I tend to do is often called “online organizing.” This term usually
means the kind of stuff you see on the MoveOn mailing list: emails
asking you to call your senator, host a house party, attend a vigil —
but mostly tell your friends and give us money. Since I got into this
business, cranky old-timers have been yelling at me that organizing
people over the Internet is impossible, that you have to organize people
face-to-face. This struck me as a ridiculous claim (and still does), but
I think I now see the truth these critics are reacting to.

Online organizing is a huge misnomer. Sending emails to millions isn’t
organizing, any more than writing company wide memos is managing. It
does not teach people new skills or persuade them of a larger vision or
get them to continue the work themselves. It takes people where they are
and gives them small things they can do from there.

Mobilizing can be done thru any medium. The folks who knock on your door
to ask for your vote (or donation) are face-to-face mobilizers. You can
do the same by telephone or television (call now to contribute!). It is,
however, a one-way relationship. You are simply a number on a list.

But this doesn’t mean online organizing is impossible, just that it
isn’t often done. Obviously it’s much harder than mere mobilization—and
much more complicated—but it’s much more rewarding as well. It is what
makes for a successful open source project, or a thriving online
community. The problem is one of scale — and that’s true when it’s done
through any medium. IAF and ACORN never had five million members. Still,
this seems to be the genuinely important question: whether the scaling
power of the Internet allows for a revolution in the scale of real
organizing. I don’t know, but the first step toward answering it is
being clear about what it means.


The Perils of Parfit 1: Credible Commitments
============================================

July 1, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/parfit1)

* * * * *

On the advice of several people, I started reading Derek Parfit’s
*Reasons and Persons*. I haven’t gotten very far, but it seems to me to
be a horribly muddled book, wrong on just about every point. So perhaps
this will be an ongoing series where I debunk the book in sequence. I
apologize to my readers if these posts seem obvious and not very
interesting. That’s because I think the situations Parfit discusses are
actually quite simple and it’s only his muddled terminology that makes
them seem tricky.

Let’s clarify Parfit’s discussion of self-defeating theories, which
really comes down to a discussion about credible commitments. For
simplicity, imagine there is no interest or inflation and your only goal
in life is to maximize how much money you have. Thus an act is rational
iff it contributes to that goal.

Case 1: There are two buttons. SUBTRACT removes \$1000 from your bank
account, ADD adds \$5000 to your bank account. Obviously it is rational
to press ADD and irrational to press SUBTRACT.

Case 2: There is one button, BOTH, which does both at the same time.
Obviously it is rational to press BOTH, since it results in a net gain
of \$4000.

Case 3: There is a different button, DELAY, which adds \$5000 to your
bank account today and then removes \$1000 in exactly one week. (DELAY
is a weird button — to prevent you from using it twice at the same time,
it stays down for the whole week and only pops back up once the \$1000
is removed.) Obviously it is rational to press DELAY since it too
results in a net gain of \$4000.

Case 4: There are two buttons: DELAY, which is the same as before, and
EVADE, which changes your bank account number so that none of the other
buttons work. You can only press each button once and they have no other
consequences. It is rational to press DELAY and then EVADE, for a net
gain of \$5000.

When is it rational to press EVADE? Only when you don’t expect to be
able to press DELAY ever again. (EVADE gains you at most \$1000, while
DELAY gains you at least \$4000.) If you could press DELAY twice, would
it be rational to hit EVADE after the first press? Of course not, it’d
cost you at least \$4000. But Parfit seems to suggest one is acting
rationally irrationally by not pressing it. The notion seems
nonsensical.

Case 5: Same two buttons, except after you press the DELAY button it
engages a little impenetrable metal cover that physically prevents you
from pressing EVADE. It’s rational to press DELAY. Then it’s rational to
press EVADE, but that’s kind of irrelevant, because it’s also
impossible.

Case 6: Same as 5, except it injects you with a serum that prevents you
from pressing EVADE. Again, it’s rational to press DELAY and then
rational but impossible to press EVADE.

I don’t see a big difference between these two cases, but Parfit seems
to think the difference is vital.

Perhaps it’s the fact that another person is involved that leads to the
complications?

Case 7: Same as 4, except the \$1000 goes into Bob’s account and only
Bob can press DELAY. Bob has the same notion of rationality as you and
thus will only press DELAY if he believes you will not press EVADE. You
could promise not to press it, but it would be irrational for you to
keep that promise so Bob rightly does not believe it. However, it would
be rational for you to engage the impenetrable cover or take the serum
that prevents you from pressing EVADE.

There is no rational irrationality. Your goal of maximizing your money
is not self-defeating. This all seems like the most obvious, unarguable
stuff in the world. So I don’t see why Parfit is so confused about it.


You Don’t Know John (Maynard Keynes)
====================================

July 27, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/knowkeynes)

* * * * *

From the right, [Gary Becker
writes](http://www.becker-posner-blog.com/2009/11/how-to-increase-employment--becker.html):

> Keynes and many earlier economists emphasized that unemployment rises
> during recessions because nominal wage rates tend to be inflexible in
> the downward direction.

From the left, [Matt Yglesias
writes](http://yglesias.thinkprogress.org/2010/07/stimulus-and-the-welfare-state/):

> …the Keynesian prescription is not only for the government to run
> deficits in response to recessions, but to run surpluses in
> expansions. Thus, the Clinton administration’s fiscal policies were
> arguably “Keynesian” but the Reagan and (especially) George W Bush
> administrations were implementing an agenda that flew in the face of
> Keynes’ ideas much more clearly than anything Angela Merkel’s ever
> done.

Neither of these are true at all. Pretty much the very first thing
Keynes says in the general theory is that downwardly-inflexible nominal
wage rates (sticky wages) are a *good* thing. And he spends a large part
of chapter 8 denouncing the practice of saving surpluses (sinking
funds).

So where do they get this stuff? While these aren’t the views of Keynes,
both these views are held by the so-called “New Keynesians” — people
like Paul Krugman and Greg Mankiw, who have tried to shoehorn a moderate
version of Keynes into classical economics. These proponents are rather
more prominent than more traditional Keynesians like Jamie Galbraith, so
political commentators hear their view and assume it’s a faithful
representation of Keynes’ own.

Perhaps Keynes was wrong — after all, we shouldn’t slavishly follow the
scribblings of some defunct economist. But if so, we should tell the
truth and admit we’re disagreeing with Keynes, not expounding his ideas.
(Both Yglesias and Becker have not run a correction, despite my emails.)
Furthermore, we should actually engage with Keynes’ argument.

On sticky wages, Keynes says that if nominal wages could fall, then
nominal costs would fall, which would mean that nominal prices would
fall, which means that real wages would end up staying the
same.^[1](#fn:q1)^ But, even worse, if there was no stickiness at all,
nothing would stop nominal wages from falling further and further until
eventually everyone was paid zero.^[2](#fn:q2)^ I have never heard the
New Keynesians respond to this argument.

On the question of surpluses, Keynes criticizes them as a pointless
reduction of aggregate demand. They create unemployment because they
take money out of circulation for no real purpose. It’s just supposed to
sit around until a “rainy day” when the economy isn’t doing so well. But
when that rainy day comes, the reason the economy isn’t doing well is
because people are out of work. If that’s true, you can simply print
more money to get them back to work without any ill effects. (Printing
money only causes inflation at full employment.) You don’t get any
benefit from having taken the money out of circulation
earlier.^[3](#fn:q3)^

Both these seem like strong arguments to me. Perhaps that’s why it’s
easier to pretend they don’t exist.

* * * * *

1.  [Chapter
    2](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch02.htm):

    > …if money-wages change, one would have expected the classical
    > school to argue that prices would change in almost the same
    > proportion, leaving the real wage and the level of unemployment
    > practically the same as before, any small gain or loss to labour
    > being at the expense or profit of other elements of marginal cost
    > which have been left unaltered.

    [↩](#fnref:q1)

2.  [Chapter
    21](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch21.htm):

    > If, on the contrary, money-wages were to fall without limit
    > whenever there was a tendency for less than full employment, the
    > asymmetry would, indeed, disappear. But in that case there would
    > be no resting-place below full employment until either the rate of
    > interest was incapable of falling further or wages were zero. In
    > fact we must have some factor, the value of which in terms of
    > money is, if not fixed, at least sticky, to give us any stability
    > of values in a monetary system.

    [↩](#fnref:q2)

3.  [Chapter
    8](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch08.htm):

    > We must also take account of the effect on the aggregate
    > propensity to consume of Government sinking funds for the
    > discharge of debt paid for out of ordinary taxation. For these
    > represent a species of corporate saving, so that a policy of
    > substantial sinking funds must be regarded in given circumstances
    > as reducing the propensity to consume. It is for this reason that
    > a change-over from a policy of Government borrowing to the
    > opposite policy of providing sinking funds (or *vice versa*) is
    > capable of causing a severe contraction (or marked expansion) of
    > effective demand.
    >
    > […]
    >
    > Or again, in Great Britain at the present time (1935) [thanks to]
    > the principles of “sound” finance [sinking funds are so large]
    > that even if private individuals were ready to spend the whole of
    > their net incomes it would be a severe task to restore full
    > employment…The sinking funds of local authorities now stand … at
    > an annual figure of more than half the amount which these
    > authorities are spending on the whole of their new developments.
    > [footnote giving the amounts] Yet it is not certain that the
    > Ministry of Health are aware, when they insist on stiff sinking
    > funds by local authorities, how much they may be aggravating the
    > problem of unemployment.

    [↩](#fnref:q3)




Campaigners, Please!
====================

August 4, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/campaigners)

* * * * *

So I’m looking to hire a campaigner for my online progressive group.
What does a campaigner do? Well, the basic process looks like this:

1.  Read the news and look for a political fight that might interest
    people.

2.  Think of a way that ordinary people can get involved.

3.  Write an email briefly explaining the issue and persuading people to
    take action on it.

4.  Channel those actions into a wider impact, e.g. by informing the
    press, delivering petitions, running ads, etc.

People who might be a good fit for this include political bloggers, who
have a lot of experience with 1 and 3, and people who have run campaigns
on local issues, giving them experience with 2 and 4. It’s also helpful
if you have experience with web design and HTML.

But the most important thing is just being creative and persuasive and
passionate about the issues. Every campaign is different and each one
has to be run differently to seize people’s attention. Someone who can
think outside the box and try something new each time is going to be
more successful than someone who’s an expert at the standard way of
doing things.

Having done it myself, nothing competes with the thrill of running a
campaign. Instead of just getting upset about the news, you get to do
something about it. You get to rally people to action, explain the story
to the media, and really get into a fight with the bad guys. And every
once in a while you actually win a victory that improves the lives of
millions of people. It’s ridiculously exciting, fun, and rewarding.

If you’re interested, send a resume and a short note persuading me to
take some action to [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) with
“campaigner” in the subject.


Rethinking Hyperbolic Discounting (or, The Percentage Fallacy, Continued)
=========================================================================

October 7, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/percentagefallacy2)

* * * * *

In a famous experiment, some people are asked to choose between \$100
today or \$120 tomorrow. Many choose the first. Meanwhile, some people
are asked to choose between \$100 sixty days from now or \$120 sixty-one
days from now. Almost everyone choose the laster. The puzzle is this:
why are people willing to sacrifice \$20 to avoid waiting a day right
now but not in the future?

The standard explanation is hyperbolic discounting: humans tend to weigh
immediate effects much more strongly than distant ones. But I think the
actual psychological effect at work here is just [the percentage
fallacy](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/percentagefallacy). If I ask for
the money now, I may have to wait 60 seconds. But if I get it tomorrow I
have to wait 143900%more. By contrast, waiting 61 days is only 1.6%
worse than waiting 6 days. Why not wait an extra 2% when you get 16%
more money for it?

Has anyone done a test confirming the percentage fallacy? A good test
would be to show people treat the \$100 vs. \$120 tradeoff as equivalent
to the \$1000 to \$1200 tradeoff.


The Real Problem with *Waiting for “Superman”*
==============================================

October 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/waitingforsuperman)

* * * * *

[[crossposted at
HuffPo](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/aaron-swartz/the-real-problem-with-wai_b_748748.html)]

*Waiting for “Superman”*, in case you haven’t heard, is the hot new film
from *Inconvenient Truth* director Davis Guggenheim. While his last film
capitalized on liberal guilt over destroying our planet (and maybe
voting for Ralph Nader?), *“Superman”* (yes, the film is weirdly
insistent on those unnecessary quotation marks) is for people who feel
bad about sending their kids to private school while poor kids wallow in
the slums.

“Teaching should be easy,” Guggenheim declares as we watch a cartoon
teacher rip open his students’ skulls and pour what looks like blue
Spaghetti-O’s inside. (When he closes the skulls the kids sprout wings
and fly out the open classroom window.) This is about as close as the
film gets to depicting actual teaching. (I checked with the friend who
paid for my ticket and he confirmed this scene was meant seriously,
though thankfully not literally.)

Despite repeatedly insisting poor kids just need better teachers, the
film never says what it is that better teachers actually do. Instead it
highlights the voices of American Express pitchman Geoffrey Canada and
Bill Gates, whose obsessions with higher standardized test scores have
led their schools to cancel recess and art in favor of more hours of
scripted memorization. Why bother with art if teaching is just about
filling kids’ heads with pre-determined facts?

The real crisis in American education isn’t teachers’ unions preventing
incompetent teachers from getting fired (as awful as that may be), it’s
the single-minded focus on standardized test scores that underlies
everything from Bush’s No Child Left Behind to Obama’s Race to the Top
to the charter schools lionized in the film. Real education is about
genuine understanding and the ability to figure things out on your own;
not about making sure every 7th grader has memorized all the facts some
bureaucrats have put in the 7th grade curriculum.

This would be obvious if the film dared to show real teaching in the
schools it lauds. Instead of the rich engagement you imagine from
progressive private schools, you find teachers who read from assigned
scripts while enforcing a regime of zero-tolerance discipline. They’re
nightmarish gulags where children’s innate creativity is beaten out of
them and replaced with martial order. Because standardized behavior is
what makes you do well on standardized tests.

Film is the perfect medium for showing what this life is like. Seeing
terrified kids up on the big screen, you can’t help but empathize with
them. So we never see it. Instead, the film hides behind charts and
graphs and interviews. “When you see a great teacher, you are seeing a
work of art,” Geoffrey Canada tells us, but this is something Guggenheim
would rather tell than show.

The film has other flaws. It insists all of America’s problems would be
solved if only poor kids would memorize more: Pittsburgh is falling
apart not because of deindustrialization, but because its schools are
filled with bad teachers. American inequality isn’t caused by decades of
Reaganite tax cuts and deregulation, but because of too many failing
schools. Our trade deficit isn’t a result of structural economic factors
but simply because Chinese kids get a better education. Make no mistake,
I desperately want every kid to go to a school they love, but it seems
far-fetched to claim this would solve all our country’s other problems.
At the end of the day, we have an economy that works for the rich by
cheating the poor and unequal schools are the result of that, not the
cause.

I’m glad a talented filmmaker has decided to draw attention to the
horrible inequities in our nation’s schools. But I’m terrified that the
solutions put forth by its proponents will only make things worse. We
know what happens when we fire teachers who don’t do enough to raise
their students’ test scores, or when we adopt more stringent
requirements for classroom curriculum: we squeeze out what little
genuine education these schools have left. And that’s something we
should really feel guilty about.


When Brute Force Fails
======================

October 18, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bruteforce)

* * * * *

Liberals don’t like talking about crime. The classic answer—fixing the
root causes of crime—now seems hopelessly ambitious. And our natural
sympathy for the millions ground down by an out-of-control prison system
and a pointless war on drugs doesn’t play well with voters, especially
when most criminals can’t vote. The general belief seems to be that the
problem of crime has been solved—after all, crime levels have dropped
dramatically since the law-and-order 80s—and that the real problem now
is not too much crime, but too much punishment. If voters don’t agree,
it’s because TV news continues to obsess over violent crime even as
actual occurrences of it have cratered, leaving behind a population who
wants to do even more to crack down on an army of bad guys who don’t
really exist. The smartest liberal position on crime seems to be
changing the subject and talking about white-collar crime instead
(which, as recent economic news has made clear, is a real epidemic).

Mark Kleiman, in his brilliant new book, *When Brute Force Fails*, takes
a different view. Crime, aside from drug crimes (where his work
persuasively argues that “the abuse of illicit drugs is a human tragedy
but not a major threat to the social order”), is serious. (Presumably
this only applies to classic violent crimes; it’s obvious this logic
doesn’t work for violations of copyright law and civil disobedience.)
Even where there’s a small amount of actual crime, it’s possible that’s
just because people are wasting so much time preventing it. There’s a
serious social cost to having to remember to lock our doors and carry
our keys around all the time, let alone the money we waste on burglar
alarms and car-tracking services and all the rest.

While I find the methodology he uses to show it wildly
problematic^[1](#fn:fn1)^, I agree with his point that crime really
sucks. Even if a burglar only causes \$400 worth of damage, I’d pay far
more than \$400 to prevent a burglary — the loss of privacy, the sense
of violation, the disruption of my normal order, the distraction of
having to deal with police and repairmen and insurance agents, etc. all
add up to make burglary a nightmare well above the direct economic
damage it causes.

Such things are a frustration for white suburbanites, but for poor
people stuck in the ghetto, they’re a nightmare. Crime is yet another
disadvantage and a particularly noxious one at that. Even aside from all
the other indignities suffered by the poor, just imagining life in a
crime-ridden neighborhood is enough to make your skin crawl.

But, Kleiman insists, we also have to count the harm to the criminals!
Going through lengthy court proceedings, spending years in abusive
prisons, having to deal with officious parole officers and the loss of
liberty they cause are all serious costs and we can’t wave them away
just because they happen to the bad guys. Law enforcement isn’t a
zero-sum game: both criminals and victims can benefit from less
punishment.^[2](#fn:fnr)^

So there’s the question: How can we have less crime with less
punishment? The first thing to notice is that low-crime is an
equilibrium state: if nobody is committing any crimes, all anti-crime
resources can be focused on anyone who decides to break the law, making
it irrational for them to even try. But high-crime is also an
equilibrium (assuming reasonable levels of punishment): if everyone is
breaking the law, the police can’t possibly stop all of them, so it’s
not so risky to keep on breaking the law.

To reduce both crime and punishment, you just need to tip the society
from one equilibrium to the other. And, Kleiman argues, we can do that
with a technique he calls “dynamic concentration.” Imagine there are
three robbers (Alice, Bob, and Carol) and one policeman (Eve). Eve can
only stop one robber at a crime, so if more than one person is
committing a burglary at the same time, she decides to be fair and
switch around who she arrests — sometimes she nabs Alice, sometimes Bob,
sometimes Carol.

The problem is that the robbers know this and they know it means they
only have a 1/3 chance of getting caught. A guaranteed arrest is bad
news, but a 1/3 chance of getting arrested isn’t worth quitting over. So
the robbers keep on robbing and the cop keeps failing to keep up with
them.

But now imagine Eve adopts a new policy: dynamic concentration. Instead
of randomly deciding who to go after, she goes after people in
alphabetical order. So if Alice is committing a crime, Eve always goes
after her first if she’s committing a crime — otherwise Bob, and then
Carol. Now Alice knows that if she robs someone, she’s guaranteed to get
caught (instead of just having a one-third chance), so she decides to
sit this one out. You might think this would just lead Bob to step into
the breach, but now that Alice is out, Eve can turn her focus to Bob
instead. So Bob also decides to call it quits. That just leaves Carol,
who Eve now gets to watch like a hawk, and so Carol also gives up the
game. And there you have it: dynamic concentration stops all the crime
without adding any more police.

Obviously things aren’t so clean in the real world, but I think this is
the first game-theoretic argument I’ve read that seems to have some real
force. Kleiman backs it up with some messier simulations and some
real-life examples. Unfortunately, most are stories about cracking down
on drugs or other unserious crimes like squeegee men, but the general
point seems to work.

For twenty years, High Point, North Carolina had tried to fight the
crack dealing in the city’s African-American West End neighborhood. Any
viewer of *The Wire* can guess the results: as soon as they made a case
against one drug dealer, another would jump in to take his place. So
with the help of crime scholar David Kennedy, they tried a new approach.
First, they spent months building trust between the police and the
community to build consensus that the drug trade was something worth
stopping. Then they pushed extra resources into the neighborhood and
started putting together cases against the dealers — but didn’t make any
arrests. Only when they had a case against every known dealer did they
act.

Even then they didn’t make arrests. They visited the dealer’s homes with
a neighborhood leader, who told them that the neighborhood had decided
they had to go straight. Meanwhile a cop presented them with the legal
case against them. The pair asked the dealer to quit and offered
whatever services—tattoo removal, job training—would help them do that.
Ten of the thirteen dealers took them up on the offer, leaving plenty of
room for the justice system to lock up the remaining three, plus the one
new dealer who tried to take over their old business. Five years later,
the market is still closed, and the police have been able to direct
their resources to pull the same trick on the other drug markets. Crime
is down, and arrests are down too. Dynamic concentration works, with the
city’s different drug markets standing in for Alice, Carol, and Bob.
(The other examples—especially Hawaii’s HOPE program—are even more
interesting, but take longer to tell.)

Dynamic concentration isn’t a panacea. Obviously it only works where the
costs of monitoring are much less than the costs of enforcement. But
this still leaves lots of opportunities and clever selection of the
population to concentrate on can significantly decrease the cost of
monitoring.

While the big idea of dynamic concentration is at the center of the
book, it’s not one of those one-trick monographs where the author lays
out one good idea and then spends the rest of the book repeating it.
Instead, the book ranges over the whole theory and practice crime
control in America and nearly every page is filled with interesting
facts and a new perspective.

And in a brilliant final chapter, he turns his lens on himself and asks
what could go wrong with his proposals. For an intellectual, the level
of humility and self-criticism involved is truly impressive. (He
confesses to probably all of the complaints that you’re thinking about
raising right now.)

For anyone interested in policy analysis, this book should be a classic.
It shows how simple tools (calculating the scale of the problem,
modeling it with game theory, and calculating the costs of a solution)
can have radical implications.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691142084)

* * * * *

1.  Kleiman uses surveys asking people how much they would pay to
    achieve a ten percent reduction in a crime. Aside from all the usual
    problems with such willingness-to-pay metrics, this seems like a
    particularly meaningless question. I don’t have a good sense of what
    the crime rate is, let alone what a 10% decrease in it would look
    like. I can’t possibly assign a sensible monetary value to something
    so abstract. It’d be better to ask people what they’d pay to prevent
    one crime, assuming the crime rate is low enough that [Karelis-type
    effects](http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks/book.asp?isbn=9780300120905)
    don’t come into play. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Since a rational criminal would by definition be better off
    committing the crime, this mainly comes up in cases of information
    asymmetry. Unlike in playground games of Cops and Robbers, real
    police are better off warning the criminals away from doing crime
    than tricking them into doing it and then sneaking up and catching
    them. [↩](#fnref:fnr)




Outline of a Digital Preservation System
========================================

October 18, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/preservation)

* * * * *

I hate losing data. Don’t you wish there was some way to store stuff so
that it will be available forever, so that your websites could live on
even after you die? But it’s a tricky problem. There are a number of
things you have to worry about:

-   Hardware failure. The disk you had your data on died and you can’t
    get data off it anymore. Or, even worse, your data has been silently
    corrupted.

-   Hardware skew. Your disks are still good, but they’re ancient and
    obscure and no one has drivers for them anymore. (I have some old
    IBM tapes that I can’t read because the devices are so obscure.)

-   Filesystem skew. You can read the raw devices but the data was
    stored on it using a striping technology no modern operating systems
    implement, with a filesystem which stopped being supported after its
    lead developer was arrested for murder, and then encoded with a
    higher-level file distribution system that used erasure coding to
    spread data across multiple machines.

-   Format skew. Your documents may be stored in an obscure format that
    nobody has a reader for anymore.

-   Institutional failure. The people in charge of making sure all the
    other problems get addressed die or move on.

There’s a basic outline to the skew problems: use the simplest, most
popular choice possible and then move to a replacement as it shows signs
of going permanently extinct. It seems unlikely to me that ASCII text on
a Unix file system in a JBOD configuration will ever completely die off,
but if it does you’ll be safe for a long time before you’ll have to move
things over.

Similarly, for the failure problems you want: a) to choose reliable
material, b) to implement constant sanity checks, and c) have several
layers of backups if the sanity checks don’t get executed or fail.

OK, so let’s get to a specific outline. You have a bunch of standard
files (mostly ASCII derivatives, maybe PDFs) in a standard file system
(UFS?) mounted read-only (with hardware-level write-prevention) from a
bunch of standard SATA disks (no RAID or anything like that) on some
machines running a modern Unix. You can serve these files up using
bog-standard HTTP (or any other file transfer protocol that can be
mapped to the model of a Unix file system). The file names (less a
prefix for mounting the drive) are designed to be globally unique. The
best way to do this is probably to combine a date and a DNS name (ala
`tag:`). So you could imagine this file to be at:

    /hdd7/2002/www.aaronsw.com/weblog/preservation.html

Alongside the files, for each drive you have a manifest that lists the
date the file was added to the preservation system followed by the
globally-unique filename and two hashes: a fast hash (probably CRC32)
and a standard secure hash (probably SHA1). As a background process, you
(nightly? weekly?—depends on how long it takes, I guess) go through each
file and compare its fast hash against the one listed in the manifest.
If the comparison fails, you go offline and sound the alarm.

Going offline isn’t so bad, because you have at least two other replicas
in different geographic locations under different political regimes. Any
request traffic can go to them instead while you restore your system.

For safety, you should probably toss the whole drive and get it restored
from one of the replica sites.

The manifest from each system at each site is replicated on a series of
index servers (at least one at each site). The index servers run a
simple HTTP redirector that maps from the secure hash or the globally
unique filename to a box storing the file, using a table they generate
from the manifests.

If bandwidth isn’t an issue, the index server should proxy the data
instead of redirecting you to preserve URLs. If it is an issue, you
should probably try to reset the DNS name to any server which has failed
to point to another redirector. So you can imagine the stable URL being:

    http://preservation.example.org/2002/www.aaronsw.com/weblog/preservation.html

and that redirecting to:

    http://27.preservation.example.org/hdd7/2002/www.aaronsw.com/weblog/preservation.html

which serves the file. When 27 fails (i.e. is no longer serving all the
data it was previously serving), it’s given a new number and the DNS `A`
record for 27.web.resource.org is changed to point to the index servers.
The index servers strip off any hdd prefix (such prefixes are prohibited
at the root of the global namespace) and serve the request as they do a
request for the stable URL.

The index servers also have a manifest of the manifests (with similar
regular verification procedures). Each data server regularly publishes a
file with the date and the secure hash of the manifest that its regular
check was compared against. The index servers regularly request this
file from each of the data servers and take offline any servers whose
manifest hash doesn’t match the one in their manifest of manifests.

Finally, a master manifest is generated by combining all of the
manifests, sorting by date, and removing duplicates. (If in this process
you find two different hashes for the same file, go offline and sound
the alarm.) At the end of every day during which files were added to the
collection, the system verifies that the secure hash of all the files up
through yesterday is the same as it was yesterday and then makes sure
the index servers all agree on the new hash. If there is consensus, the
hash of this new master manifest is calculated and very widely published
(perhaps including a classified ad in the largest newspaper in each
country). You should always be able to work backward from this
widely-published hash to a correct state of the entire system. And since
all of the manifests are public, anyone with a recent newspaper and some
time on their hands should be able to verify the accuracy of their data.

Now this protects against accidental day-to-day hardware failure, but
you also want to protect against long-tail catastrophic failures. You
should use hetrogenous systems to avoid simultaneous hardware failure or
software vulnerability, there should be no one with physical or
electronic access to all the systems, as much as possible you should not
be able to delete data without physical access, and the locations should
be physically secure. Does it make sense to make an alternate copy (i.e.
paper with bytes written in OCR-A or something?) in case of an EMP blast
or something like that? Thinking about how to protect against these
obscure failures seems like the trickiest part.

This system should be fairly simple to implement and operate (I can’t
imagine it being more than a couple pages of Python code) but even so
you need someone to implement and operate it.

Recall that we have at least three sites in three political
jurisdictions. Each site should be operated by an independent
organization in that political jurisdiction. Each board should be
governed by respected community members with an interest in
preservation. Each board should have at least five seats and move
quickly to fill any vacancies. An engineer would supervise the systems,
an executive director would supervise the engineer, the board would
supervise the executive director, and the public would supervise the
board.

There are some basic fixed costs for operating such a system. One should
calculate the high-end estimate for such costs along with high-end
estimates of their growth rate and low-end estimates of the riskless
interest rate and set up an endowment in that amount. The endowment
would be distributed evenly to each board who would invest it in
riskless securities (probably in banks whose deposits are ensured by
their political systems).

Whenever someone wants to add something to the collection, you use the
same procedure to figure out what to charge them, calculating the
high-end cost of maintaining that much more data, and add that fee to
the endowments (split evenly as before).

What would the rough cost of such a system be? Perhaps the board and
other basic administrative functions would cost \$100,000 a year, and
the same for an executive director and an engineer. That would be
\$300,000 a year. Assuming a riskless real interest rate of 1%, a
perpetuity for that amount would cost \$30 million. Thus the cost for
three such institutions would be around \$100 million. Expensive, but
not unmanageable. (For comparison, the Internet Archive has an annual
budget of \$10-15M, so this whole project could be funded until the end
of time for about what 6-10 years of the Archive costs.)

Storage costs are trickier because the cost of storage and so on falls
so rapidly, but a very conservative estimate would be around \$2000 a
gigabyte. Again, expensive but not unmanageable. For the price of a
laptop, you could have a gigabyte of data preserved for perpetuity.

These are both very high-end estimates. I imagine that were someone to
try operating such a system it would quickly become apparent that it
could be done for much less. Indeed, I suspect a Mad Archivist could set
up such a system using only hobbyist levels of money. You can recruit
board members in your free time, setting up the paperwork would be a
little annoying but not too expensive, and to get started you’d just
need three servers. (I’ll volunteer to write the Python code.) You could
then build up the endowment through the interest money left over after
your lower-than-expected annual costs. (If annual interest payments ever
got truly excessive, the money could go to reducing the accession costs
for new material.)

Any Mad Archivists around?

[Thanks to Brewster Kahle and the Internet Archive for inspiring many of
the technical details of this scheme.]


A Censorship-Resistant Web
==========================

December 21, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/uncensor)

* * * * *

Imagine someone put a document up at
`http://pentagonpapers.com/volumes/1.html` that a) some people want to
read and b) some people want to keep you from reading.

Step one: How it works now
--------------------------

On the current Web, the way you request such a document is like this:

1.  You ask one of your pre-programmed root servers who is in charge of
    `.com`
2.  They respond with VeriSign, so you ask VeriSign who is in charge of
    `pentagonpapers.com`
3.  They respond with Acme ISP, so you ask ACME ISP where to find
    `pentagonpapers.com`
4.  It responds with an IP address, so you request the page from that IP

The censors can ask VeriSign to give them control of pentagonpapers.com,
they can try to shut down Acme ISP, they can try to prevent you from
getting hosting, and they can try to shut down your IP. All of these
have been used recently, with some success. You need a backup plan.

Let’s imagine we want this URL to resolve in an uncensorable way. How
would we do it?

Step one: Domain name ownership
-------------------------------

First we would have a *certificate authority* (CA) which would sign
statements of the form: “As of [DATE], [DOMAIN NAME] is owned by the
holder of [PUBLIC KEY].” (Let’s call this a *certificate*.)
Conveniently, there’s already a whole industry of trusted businesses
that make these statements — they’re called SSL certificates.

The problem is that CAs are presumably just as subject to attack as the
registrars (in fact, in some cases they are the registrars!). One
possibility is to set up a certificate authority that will not sign such
statements for people attempting to engage in censorship. It seems
probable that such a policy would be protected by the First Amendment in
the US. However, “people engaging in censorship” is a somewhat
subjective notion. Also, it’s always possible a court could order the
certificate authority to turn over the private signing key (or the key
could be obtained in some other way).

Another possibility is some kind of “rollback UI”. If you know vaguely
when the censorship attempts started, you can only trust certifications
made before that date. This is a somewhat difficult feature to implement
in a way that makes sense to users, though. The best case scenario is
one in which the user can clearly distinguish between a censored and
uncensored page. In that case, if the page appears censored they can hit
a “go back a month” button and the system will only trust certifications
made more than a month prior to the certification it’s currently using.
The user can hit this button repeatedly until they get an uncensored
version of the page.

Step two: Web page authentication
---------------------------------

Next the owner of the website will need to sign statements of the form
“The content of [URL] had the hash [HASH] on [DATE].” (Let’s call this
an *authenticator*.) Now given a page, a corresponding valid
authenticator, and a corresponding valid certificate (call this trio an
*authentic page*), browsers can safely display a page even if it can’t
access the actual web server. The digital signatures work together to
prove that the page is what the website owner wanted to publish. If a
browser gets back multiple authentic pages, it can display the latest
one (modulo the effects of the “go back a month” button).

Step three: Getting authentic pages
-----------------------------------

Set up a series of domain-to-certificate servers. These servers take a
domain names (e.g. `pentagonpapers.com`) and returns back any
certificates for it. Certificates can be obtained by [crawling the
Web](https://www.eff.org/observatory) or by being submitted by website
owners or by being submitted by the CAs themselves.

Set up a series of URL-to-hash servers. These servers take a URL and
return back any valid authenticators for that URL. Authenticators are
very small, so each URL-to-hash server can probably store all of them.
If spam becomes a problem, a little bit of hashcash could be required
for storage. Website owners submit their authenticators to the
URL-to-hash servers.

Set up a series of hash-to-URL servers. These servers take a hash and
return a series of URLs which can be dereferenced in the normal way to
obtain a file with that hash. People can submit hash-to-URL mappings to
these servers and they can attempt to automatically verify them by
downloading the file and seeing if the hash
matches.^[1](#fn:fn1)^^[2](#fn:fn2)^ Again, these mappings are very
small so each server can probably store all of them.^[3](#fn:fnr)^

Then there are a series of servers that host controversial files.
Perhaps they saved a copy before the site was censored, perhaps they
received it thru some out-of-band channel^[4](#fn:oob)^. However they
got it, they put them up on their website and then submit the URL to the
hash-to-URL servers. Meanwhile, the site publisher submits an
authenticator to the URL-to-hash servers.

Now, if a browser cannot obtain the `pentagonpapers` page through normal
means it can:

1.  Ask each domain-to-cetificate server it knows for certificates for
    `pentagonpapers.com`
2.  Ask each URL-to-hash server it knows for authenticators for the URL
3.  Ask each hash-to-URL server it knows for alternative URLs
4.  Download from the alternative URLs^[5](#fn:fnb)^

This can be implemented through a browser plugin that you click when a
page appears to be unavailable. If it takes off, maybe it can be built
in to browsers. (While I’ve been assuming the worst-case-scenario of
censorship here, the system would be equally useful for sites that are
just down because their servers couldn’t handle the load or some other
innocent failure.)

This system should work unless our adversary can censor every well-known
CA, every well-known URL-to-hash server, every well-known hash-to-URL
server, or every alternative URL.

Step four: Beyond the Web
-------------------------

We can help ensure this by operating at least one of each as a Tor
hidden service. Because the operator of the service is anonymous, they
are immune to legal threats.^[6](#fn:fn3)^ If the user doesn’t have Tor,
they can access them through [tor2web.org](http://tor2web.org/).

Similarly, if you know your document is going to get censored, you can
skip steps 1 and 2. Instead of distributing a `pentagonpapers.com` URL
which is going to go down, you can just distribute the hash. For users
whose browsers don’t support this system, you can embed the hash in a
URL like:

    https://hash2url.org/sha1/284219ea93827cdd26f5a697112a029b515dc9a4

where `hash2url.org` is a hash-to-URL server that redirects you to a
valid URL.

And, of course, if you somehow have access to a working P2P system, you
can just it to obtain authentic pages.

Conclusions
-----------

What’s nice about this system is that it gets you censorship resistance
without introducing anything wildly new. There are already certificate
authorities. There are already hash-to-URL servers. There are already
mirrors. There’s already Tor. (There’s already tor2web.) The only really
new thing specific to censorship resistance is URL-to-hash servers of
the form I described, but they’re very simple and hopefully
uncontroversial.

There is some work to be done stitching all of these together and
improving the UI, but unlike with some other censorship-resistance
systems, there’s nothing you can point to as having no good purpose
except for helping bad guys. It’s all pretty basic and generally useful
stuff, just put together in a new way.

**If you’re interested in helping build something like this,** please
send me an email: [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

* * * * *

1.  Any server will have finite bandwidth, so an attacker could try to
    fool the hash-to-URL server by submitting a URL which when
    dereferenced never stops sending the data. The hash-to-URL servers
    should stop after a certain limit and mark the URL as unverified due
    to max file size. If the server ever obtains a file whose size is
    under the limit with that hash, it can toss all such
    URLs. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  URLs can go out of date so perhaps upon receiving sufficient
    complaints about a URL being “bad”, the server should attempt to
    reverify. Again, hashcash can be used throughout to avoid
    spam. [↩](#fnref:fn2)

3.  A possible protocol for the above two servers is provided in [RFC
    2169](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2169.txt). [↩](#fnref:fnr)

4.  I have ideas on how to automate this, naturally, but this essay is
    already far too long. [↩](#fnref:oob)

5.  *Optional bonus:* Use HTTP Range headers to download 1/n of the file
    from each of the n URLs. There are some circumstances where this
    could speed things up. Or maybe it’s just annoying. [↩](#fnref:fnb)

6.  This moves the censorship weak link to the distribution of
    introduction points to hidden services.^[7](#fn:fn5)^ But instead of
    being published by a DHT, introduction points can be distributed
    through a flood protocol^[8](#fn:fn6)^. Or maybe the DHT can be
    modified so that there’s no obvious censorship
    point? [↩](#fnref:fn3)

7.  The introduction points themselves can’t be censored because they
    don’t know who they’re talking to. (I think they do in the current
    implementation of Tor, but this doesn’t seem necessary. The hidden
    service can generate a new keypair for each introduction point and
    send the public key to the introduction point and to
    Alice.) [↩](#fnref:fn5)

8.  Is this too chatty? Probably. But remember, it’s a last-case resort
    in some kind of insane police-state world where every country
    prevents people from running servers that give out the IP addresses
    of other servers that let you talk to a third server which will give
    you illegal content. [↩](#fnref:fn6)




2010 Review of Books
====================

January 3, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2010)

* * * * *

*Previously:* [2009](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2009),
[2008](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2008books),
[2007](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2007),
[2006](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)

Unlinked means I recommend against getting it. Linked and italicized
means it’s actively recommended. Linked but not italicized is somewhere
in between. The ordering is not entirely accurate.

1.  *[Secrets](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0670030309)* by Daniel
    Ellsberg

    A fantastic book. Ellsberg turns out to be an incredible writer and
    he tells not only his own incredible story of the fight to release
    the Pentagon Papers (did you know the *New York Times* actually
    stole them from his house?), but, even more interestingly, recounts
    a great deal of fascinating personal experience about what it was
    like working with McNamara and Kissinger and trying to maintain your
    sanity in the highest levels of government.

    With the WikiLeaks cables in the news, this book is more relevant
    than ever. And personally, I can’t wait until Ellsberg’s next book,
    *The American Doomsday Machine*, comes out. ([Here’s an
    excerpt](http://www.wagingpeace.org/articles/2009/09/11_ellsberg_hundred_holocausts.php)
    from back when he planned to publish it online; since then
    [Bloomsbury snapped it
    up](http://andyrossagency.wordpress.com/2010/10/29/daniel-ellsberg-and-the-american-doomsday-machine-2/).)

    Also, be sure to check out [these
    comments](http://crookedtimber.org/2009/12/22/i-dont-mind-who-writes-the-laws-of-the-future-if-i-can-write-and-sing-the-theme-tune/)
    from Davies and Galbraith.

2.  [Bright-Sided](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B003P2VDC4) by Barbara
    Ehrenreich

    A principled opposition to positive thinking has always been a
    common Ehrenreich theme and here she expands it to book-length,
    delivering exactly what you’d expect. The good news is that it’s
    trenchant and witty, the bad news is that if you read a lot of
    Ehrenreich you probably know just what’s coming.

3.  [Scientist in the Crib](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0688177883) by
    Allison Gopnik, Andrew N. Meltzoff, Patricia K. Kuhl

    Gopnik et al. summarize the findings of their wave of infant
    research — namely that infants are trying to puzzle things out
    through experiments rather than just sitting there waiting for their
    brains to grow. Gopnik, as you’d expect, is a good writer, but their
    attempts to link their research with philosophy are a bit strained
    and the research is still weak enough that the book doesn’t quite
    feel like it pays off the title.

4.  Predictably Irrational by Dan Ariely

    Everybody’s reading it, but that doesn’t mean you have to. A
    collection of fairly mundane behavioral psychology experiments. If
    you’re really so deluded as to believe people aren’t predictably
    irrational, it’s not clear to me how a mere book could possibly help
    you.

5.  *[A Bee Stung Me So I Killed All The
    Fish](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/static/abeestungme.pdf)* [PDF] by
    George Saunders

    I love Saunders. I read [pretty much everything he’s
    written](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/User:AaronSw/George_Saunders)
    this year. This collection features some of his sillier pieces.

6.  [The Braindead Megaphone](http://books.theinfo.org/go/159448256X) by
    George Saunders

    Saunders is great, but he hasn’t quite honed his nonfiction talents
    the way he has with his fiction. Some fantastic pieces, some
    fascinating ones, and some that don’t quite work.

7.  *[Prince of the Marshes](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B002V1GZFK)* by
    Rory Stewart

    I occasionally have this fantasy, while reading the news, that
    whatever person I’m reading about has been fired and, through some
    miraculous fluke, I have been given their job. Would I make a hash
    of it? Or, would by naive mind and outsider’s expertise allow me to
    do it in a fascinating new way?

    In this book, Rory Stewart describes what happened when he was made
    a colonial governor of a province in Iraq. Brilliant fellow that he
    is, he does a remarkably good job all things considered, but also
    writes a questioning, soul-searching, fascinating book about the
    experience that highlights what an impossible task it really is.

8.  *[False Profits: Recovering from the Bubble
    Economy](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0982417128)* by Dean Baker

    A short, clear book on why the economy failed, who did it, and how
    to set it right by someone who was absolutely right about it all
    along. If you only want to read one book about the economic crisis,
    this would be an excellent choice.

9.  *[The Accidental Theorist](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393318877)*
    by Paul Krugman

    A collection of Krugman’s columns for *Slate*. It was before he
    really came off his neoliberal high, but after he learned to write,
    so while they’re not always right they’re almost always delightful
    (and *Slate* gave him a lot more freedom to be playful than the
    *Times* does). A very fun book about a wide range of issues in
    economics. (Here’s [a nice
    review](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/econ_articles/reviews/krugman_accidental.html)
    from Brad DeLong.)

10. [The Political Brain](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586485733) by
    Drew Westen

    A decent book that could have been great if it had a real editor.
    There are really three things in here: 1) some fantastic examples of
    what Democrats *should* say if they have any spine (they’re the kind
    of political propaganda Lakoff would write if Lakoff could write
    political propaganda), 2) some pretty bogus fMRI experiments to give
    the text in (1) the illusion of being backed in hard science, 3)
    several hundred pages of pointless rambling and repetition. If only
    an editor could have at least removed (3).

11. *[Get Out The Vote](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0815732678)* by
    Donald Green and Alan Gerber

    Every year, thousands of Americans head out onto the streets to
    knock on their neighbors’ doors and remind them to vote. Does any of
    it have any effect? Green and Gerber had the bright idea of running
    an experiment to see: Randomize the houses and ask the canvassers to
    knock on half of them and ignore the other half. Then, check the
    voting records (which are public) to see how many people in each
    group voted. The difference can tell you if you made a difference.

    This brilliant idea sparked a whole field of experimental research
    about getting out the vote, which Green and Gerber summarize in this
    short book, aimed at some mix of scientists and political
    professionals.

12. *[Eating the Dinosaur](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1416544216)* by
    Chuck Klosterman

    Absolutely fantastic. Could hardly put it down. Chuck Klosterman is
    definitely in the running for greatest living essayist. The book is
    a collection of essays, but not, as far as I can tell, essays that
    were ever published anywhere else. They’re each just magical gems
    that fit together just perfectly. I even liked the stuff about
    football (and I’ve never seen a game of football).

    I liked this so much I went on to read all his other books in
    reverse chronological order:

13. [Chuck Klosterman IV](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743284895) by
    Chuck Klosterman

    Great, but not quite *as* great.

14. [Killing Yourself in Order to
    Live](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743264460) by Chuck Klosterman

    Merely interesting.

15. [Sex, Drugs, and Cocoa
    Puffs](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743236017) by Chuck Klosterman

    Pretty good.

    But I could not read either *Downtown Owl* (his novel) or *Fargo
    Rock City*. The rest I couldn’t put down. I guess start with *Eating
    the Dinosaur* and see how far you get.

16. [Doubt is Their Product](http://books.theinfo.org/go/019530067X) by
    David Michaels

    There are a vast array of government agencies, like the EPA and
    OSHA, whose job is to protect Americans by examining the science and
    outlawing things that hurt people. But what if the bad guys get to
    make up the science? David Michaels examines the whole industry of
    scientists-for-hire that try to manufacture doubt about the harms
    that big business commits. The title comes from a tobacco company
    memo and the tobacco companies are infamous for trying to shed doubt
    on the studies attacking their products, but the tactics they
    invented have now spread to every little chemical additive.

    Michaels is now head of OSHA. On the one hand, it’s great that such
    a corporate critic has such an influential position. On the other
    hand, this book is written in the style you’d expect from someone
    who could become head of OSHA: it’s cautious, not polemical, and
    obsessed with proving the details, rather than the bigger picture.

17. *[Why Not Socialism?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691143617)* by
    G.A. Cohen

    A great little book from the late philosopher Jerry Cohen. Not quite
    as great as [his comments about the
    shmoos](http://crookedtimber.org/2009/08/06/jerry-cohen-a-personal-appreciation/),
    but a wonderful (and, sadly, all too rare) attempt to get people
    thinking about what socialism really means and whether it would be
    practical.

18. [Free Schools](http://openlibrary.org/works/OL2933773W/Free_schools)
    by Jonathan Kozol

    An angry little book not about how bad the school system is, like
    Kozol’s usual beat, but about the people trying to change it. Both
    the folks, like Kozol, going into the inner city and trying to start
    new schools and the others running away to the land to frolic in
    freedom. Certainly a time capsule from the 1970s, but a fascinating
    one.

19. [Making Movies](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679756604) by Sidney
    Lumet

    A fairly self-absorbed book about what it means to make a movie.
    Some decent details about the practicalities in here, but mixed in
    with a lot of random musing and personal reflection.

20. *[The Persistence of
    Poverty](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0300151365)* by Charles Karelis

    I feel like I’ve written so much about this book, but none of it
    appears to have made it to this blog. A great little book, just
    enough to explain one big idea and how it overturns what you think
    about classical economics and poverty and much else besides. Here’s
    [a quick
    bit](http://yglesias.thinkprogress.org/2009/12/the-persistence-of-poverty/)
    from Matt Yglesias on it.

21. Caught Between Two Worlds: The Diary of a Lowell Mill Girl

22. Mill by David Macaulay

    I don’t understand why everyone loves Macaulay so.

23. Belles of New England

24. *[The Industrial Worker](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0929587251)* by
    Norman Ware

    A fascinating history about how mill girls and shoemakers invented
    socialism and fought for it in the early days of the republic,
    before Jefferson’s dream of independent men was crushed by the
    onslaught of industrialization.

25. *[Acme Novelty Library,
    \#19](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1897299567)* by Chris Ware

    Chris Ware is magic. This book consists mostly of a chapter from the
    work-in-progress *Rusty Brown*, which I was initially skeptical
    about, but turns out to be just amazingly great. And *Building
    Stories* is incredible too.

    Ware’s method is to publish a page each week or so in a weekly paper
    (the Sunday *New York Times*, the *Chicago Reader*), then redraw the
    entire chapter and send it out as an edition of the *Novelty
    Library*, then redraw it a third time when the entire book is
    published. So this is a way of getting intermediate results, but you
    could just wait for the final books themselves (if they are ever
    finished).

26. [The Art of Lobbying](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0872894622) by
    Bertram Levine

    A guide by a practitioner, for practitioners. Not great, but you can
    pick up a little bit of the flavor of the job from reading what the
    insiders say.

27. *[Making the Social World: The Structure of Human
    Civilization](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195396170)* by John
    Searle

    Brilliant. [My review is
    here](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dirfas).

28. [The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes Societies
    Stronger](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B004A14W0Y) by Wilkinson and
    Pickett

    Not as good as I was hoping, but still a compelling case for
    equality with a vast array of data.

29. Women at Work

30. [Loom and Spindle](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1176813617) by
    Harriet Jane Hanson Robinson

    A fantastic memoir of a fantastic time. Shows how radical even the
    moderate mill girls were.

31. *[Priceless: The Myth of Fair Value and How to Take Advantage of
    It](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0809078813)* by William Poundstone

    Poundstone is one of the great science writers of all time. Here he
    takes on behavioral economics at the very top of his game. Full of
    fascinating ideas.

32. [Influence](http://books.theinfo.org/go/006124189X) by Robert
    Cialdini

    Covers the usual results of the science on persuasion in a decent
    and clear way.

33. [Education and the Cult of
    Efficiency](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0226091503) by Raymond E.
    Callahan

    Proof that business has been trying to take over education for over
    a century.

34. [On Writing](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1439156816) by Stephen King

    Nothing earth-shattering, but it turns out Stephen King is actually
    a good writer. I honestly had no idea.

35. *[Schooling in Capitalist
    America](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0465097189)* (reread) by Samuel
    Bowles and Herbert Gintis

    The best book on the real meaning of school.

36. *[Becoming Attached](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195115015)*
    (reread) by Robert Karen

    One of my favorite books of all time. Probably the best work of
    science writing I’ve ever read.

37. *[Moral Politics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0226467716)* (reread)
    by George Lakoff

    The best book on American politics.

38. *[Unconditional Parenting](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743487486)*
    (reread) by Alfie Kohn

39. *[How Children Fail](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0201484021)*
    (reread) by John Holt

    An amazing book on education.

40. [The Lobbyists](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0812923146) by Jeffrey
    Birnbaum

41. [Dumbing Us Down](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0865714487) by John
    Taylor Gatto

42. [Winning Your Election the Wellstone
    Way](http://books.theinfo.org/go/081665333X) by Jeff Blodgett and
    Bill Lofy and others

    Really just a more-detailed version of *Politics the Wellstone Way*.

43. *[Bonfire of the Vanities](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312427573)*
    by Tom Wolfe

    Absolutely fantastic. A rare must-read novel — packed full of
    information about society, journalism, activism, race, etc. I can’t
    convey just how good it really is. It’s like *The Power Broker* of
    fiction.

44. [The Checklist Manifesto](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312430000) by
    Atul Gawande

    Not a bad book by any means, but its constrained focus means it’s
    not quite as thrilling as Gawande’s other books. It ends up mostly
    being a series of stories about how great checklists can be.
    Checklists are interesting, but they’re a very small piece of the
    institutional change that this book should really be about. You get
    a few hints at other pieces through the well-researched examples,
    but they’re only hints.

45. The Revisionists Revised by Diane Ravitch

    Eminently skimmable — Ravitch barely even tries to mount an
    argument. Instead she just sort of fumes for a hundred pages or so
    at the radical scholars who dared to point out the invention of
    school wasn’t so nobly motivated. Well, she’s come a long way — now
    she’s basically one of them. ([See this piece on her
    reversal](http://www.slate.com/blogs/blogs/thewrongstuff/archive/2010/05/17/diane-ravitch-on-being-wrong.aspx).)

46. [Free at Last: The Sudbury Valley
    School](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1888947004) by Daniel Greenberg

    Sudbury has some aspects of magic and nothing conveys them better
    than this book.

47. [Learning all the Time](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0201550911) by
    John Holt

48. [Political Polling](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0742561313) by
    Jeffrey Stonecash

    Has some decent stuff on the business side of things — how to write
    polling reports and get clients and so on.

49. [The Big Short](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393338827) by Michael
    Lewis

    Oh, what to say about this book? It’s well-written, as you’d expect,
    though no knockout. It tells a fascinating story about some aspects
    of the crisis, but goes far from unravelling the whole thing.

50. *[How to Win Friends and Influence
    People](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1439167346)* (reread) by Dale
    Carnegie

    There’s a reason this is a classic. It articulates a way of dealing
    with people, founded on concern and empathy, and convincingly argues
    that this kind style is actually the more productive one for getting
    things done. Instead of yelling at people to do things, you make
    them *want* to help you. And the book itself is a genius exemplar of
    this practice. Instead of berating you for being a jerk, like most
    people would, it persuades you to *want* to change.

51. *[The Immortal Life of Henrietta
    Lacks](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1400052173)* by Rebecca Skloot

    Everyone has praised this book, and for good reason — it deftly
    interweaves an incredible story of science with the heartbreaking
    tragedy of the people science studies. Nothing earthshattering, but
    a great piece of writing.

52. [The Design of Design](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0201362988) by
    Fred Brooks

    No deep lasting insights, but it is fascinating to watch Brooks
    struggle with these questions and it helps you struggle as well.

53. [REDACTED]

54. [The Case Against Standardized
    Tests](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0325008930) by Alfie Kohn

    If you need more reasons to hate standardized tests, this book is
    full of them.

55. [When You Were a Tadpole and I Was a
    Fish](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0374532419) by Martin Gardner

    In memoriam. In the same way that the spirit of Lenny Bruce passed
    through Bill Hicks and now Louis CK, the ghost of Feynman passed to
    Martin Gardner. His wit and curiosity, combined with a gift for
    explanation, did more than almost anyone to promote a genuine
    appreciation for math and science. This essay collection was his
    last book. (Although I’m sure many, many more will come
    posthumously.)

56. [Class War?: What Americans Really Think about Economic
    Inequality](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0226644553) by Benjamin Page
    and Lawrence Jacobs

    If the state of politics gets you down about your fellow man, this
    well-researched scientific book will persuade you that even
    Americans are egalitarians at heart.

57. [Getting to Yes](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140157352) by Roger
    Fisher and William Ury

    This book is full of alternate strategies to try, but has very
    little on the key negotiation question of what to do about
    distributing the surplus.

58. [Expert Political Judgment](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691128715)
    by Philip Tetlock

    This book is kind of a bore to read, but the story it tells is
    fascinating, so [just read Louis Menand’s
    summary](http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/12/05/051205crbo_books1)
    instead.

59. [101 Things I Learned in Business
    School](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0446550280) by Michael W. Preis
    with Matthew Frederick

    A sweet, short book with cute pictures. Smart idea for a series.

60. [The Way We Were?](http://books.theinfo.org/go/087078417X)
    [[online](http://tcf.org/publications/1998/9/pb196)] by Richard
    Rothstein

    A fantastic debunking of the “kids were so much smarter back then”
    myth.

61. [The Matthew Effect](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0231149484) by
    Daniel Rigney

    Short and unmemorable.

62. [Taking Economic Seriously](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262014181)
    by Dean Baker

    A nice little summary of Dean’s big ideas.

63. *[The Meaning of David
    Cameron](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1846944562)* by Richard Seymour

    A short book on what’s happened to British politics from a radical
    perspective.

64. *[Managing to Change the
    World](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0615273416)* by Allison Green and
    Jerry Hauser

    The best book on the practicalities of management I’ve ever read.
    Whereas most books focus on vague and meaningless advice, this book
    is clear about the nuts and bolts.

65. *[Workers in a Labyrinth](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0876638175)*
    by Robert Jackall

    Not as great as my favorite book of all-time, Jackall’s *Moral
    Mazes*, but a fascinating look at how normal people make sense of
    their daily work lives.

66. Disconnect by Morris Fiorina

    Fiorina has no idea what he’s talking about in this one; it’s
    completely ridiculous. There was a long period in American politics
    where, to prevent blacks from voting, southern whites excluded
    blacks from the Democratic party primary and then always voted for
    the Democratic nominee in the general. Blacks could legally vote,
    but only in the general, when it didn’t make any difference.

    The result was that a whole lot of racist, conservative politicians
    ended up in the Democratic Party and so politics appeared less
    polarized — there were conservatives Democrats (and some liberal
    Republicans) and the conservatives and the liberals could work
    “across party lines” to get things done.

    Eventually the Supreme Court outlawed this noxious practice and the
    south started sending Republicans to Congress instead. That led to
    the conservatives leaving the Democratic party (and then the liberal
    Republicans getting kicked out too) and now when liberals or
    conservatives all work together, they only need to do so within one
    party. The result is what appears to be an increase in party
    polarization. Instead of a couple Democratic liberals and a couple
    Republican liberals writing a bill, you just get a bunch of
    Democratic liberals writing a bill.

    This is such an obvious explanation and MoFi does his best to ignore
    it, looking everywhere but the obvious place so he can wonder about
    the dangers of polarization.

67. [The Girl with the Dragon
    Tattoo](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0307454541) (1 of 3) by Stieg
    Larsson

    This book has no deep point to make, Nora Ephron has [ably
    chronicled its stylistic
    oddities](http://www.newyorker.com/humor/2010/07/05/100705sh_shouts_ephron),
    and the plot is more bizarre than compelling. Yet I couldn’t put it
    down. Indeed, I dare say I enjoyed it.

68. [The Girl who Played with
    Fire](http://books.theinfo.org/go/030745455X) (2 of 3) by Stieg
    Larsson

69. [The Girl who Kicked Over the Hornet’s
    Nest](http://books.theinfo.org/go/030726999X) (3 of 3) by Stieg
    Larsson

    These two tell a different, and in some ways more interesting story
    than the first one, but it’s not enough to change my fundamental
    evaluation.

    However, I do much prefer the original titles, which translate
    roughly to: *Men Who Hate Women*, *The Girl Who Played with Fire*,
    and *The Exploding Social Safety Net*. I guess it’s nice when that
    sort of thing can be a bestseller.

70. *[The Possessed: Adventures with Russian Books and the People Who
    Read Them](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0374532184)* by Elif Batuman

    Hilarious, brilliant, fantastic. There’s no justification for this
    book being as good as it is. Even I wasn’t interested in reading a
    book about Russian literary scholars, but it’s just incredible good
    and I’m glad I did.

71. *[This is Your Country on
    Drugs](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0470643897)* by Ryan Grim

    I would not have thought the world needed another book on drugs, but
    this one turns out to be basically perfect. Comprehensive, erudite,
    funny, and realistic — Grim definitely inhales.

72. [Scott Pilgrim’s Precious Little
    Life](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1932664084) (1 of 6) by Bryan Lee
    O’Malley

73. [Scott Pilgrim vs. The
    World](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1932664122) (2 of 6) by Bryan Lee
    O’Malley
74. [Scott Pilgrim and the Infinite
    Sadness](http://books.theinfo.org/go/193266422X) (3 of 6) by Bryan
    Lee O’Malley
75. [Scott Pilgrim Gets It
    Together](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1932664491) (4 of 6) by Bryan
    Lee O’Malley
76. [Scott Pilgrim vs. The
    Universe](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1934964107) (5 of 6) by Bryan
    Lee O’Malley
77. [Scott Pilgrim’s Finest
    Hour](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1934964387) (6 of 6) by Bryan Lee
    O’Malley

    You should *definitely* see the movie and then, if you do see it,
    it’s worth reading the books. The books are much deeper and darker
    than the movie otherwise lets on. You realize that the film you saw
    as an example of joy and exuberance is actually incredibly
    depressing.

    By contrast, we will just forget that someone made a movie of
    *Bonfire of the Vanities*. Yeek.

78. Rework by Jason Fried and David Heinemeier Hansson

79. *[Delivering Happiness](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0446563048)* by
    Tony Hsieh

    This book is more the story of Hsieh’s insane journey toward
    creating Zappos than the business advice book it looks like, but
    that’s OK because it’s an incredible story and Hsieh’s exuberant
    retelling makes it impossible to put down.

80. [Meta Math!](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1400077974) by Gregory
    Chaitin

    Chaitin makes an obscure field you’ve never heard of like
    Algorithmic Information Theory sound interesting and fun, even if
    you don’t know any math.

81. [Philosophy in a New
    Century](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521731585) by John Searle

    A collection of some great essays by Searle.

82. The Essential Drucker by Peter Drucker

    Drucker sounds like the kind of person I should like, but I’ve never
    actually liked him.

83. Socks by Beverly Cleary

84. Beezus and Ramona by Beverly Cleary
85. Ramona the Pest by Beverly Cleary
86. Ramona the Brave by Beverly Cleary

    I read these to the seven-year-old, at her insistence. They weren’t
    great, but they were at least tolerable, unlike some of the other
    stuff she likes.

87. XKCD, vol. 0 by Randall Munroe

    You no doubt already read xkcd online. Yet apparently many people
    also bought this paper copy. And they said print was dead!

88. [The Promise: President Obama, Year
    One](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1847398065) by Jonathan Alter

    No great revelations, but it is shocking how little actual thought
    goes on in the Obama White House.

89. *[Microeconomics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691126380)* by Samuel
    Bowles

    A textbook that totally upends the field of classical economics.
    Sadly, it can be a bit hard to follow, but I wrote [summaries of it
    here](http://groups.google.com/group/bowles-l/topics).

90. *[All Art is Propaganda: Critical
    Essays](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0156033070)* by George Orwell
    (with introduction by Keith Gessen)

    Orwell is magic.

91. [Toyota Production System](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0915299143)
    by Taiichi Ohno

    It’s hard to find a better book that describes what lean production,
    in its original sense, is all about than this translated work from
    its creator. I hope that Ohno one day gets the recognition he
    deserves: as one of the world’s first pioneers in what is
    undoubtedly the greatest human art form (with sex running a close
    second).

92. [Freedom](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312600844) by Jonathan
    Franzen

    Flashes of greatness mixed with strings of ridiculousness. (This is
    Franzen’s Great American Novel, in case you hadn’t heard.) Could
    have been truly great if Franzen had a great editor, but instead all
    his indulgences were left in. It’s certainly no competition for DFW.
    (Sorry, Franzen!)

93. [The Machine that Changed the World: The Story of Lean
    Production—Toyota’s Secret Weapon in the Global Car Wars That Is Now
    Revolutionizing World
    Industry](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743299795) by James P.
    Womack, Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos

    Not bad, but feels a bit like reading a book by a bunch of blind men
    trying to explain the elephant charging toward them.

94. Conscience of a Liberal by Paul Krugman

    Did I really read this book? I don’t remember it at all.

95. [How to Become a Scandal](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805089799) by
    Laura Kipnis

    Kipnis’ writing is fun, as always, but there’s no real insight here.

96. [Poisoned for Pennies: The Economics of Toxics and
    Precaution](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1597264016) by Frank
    Ackerman

    A fantastic book on the serious trouble with using mathematical
    cost-benefit analyses to try to decide when to protect the
    environment.

97. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty by Albert O. Hirschman

    A disappointment. Perhaps all its insights have become common
    knowledge since then.

98. REDACTED

99. [Beyond the Hoax](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0199561834) by Alan
    Sokal

    Alan Sokal returns again with a book collecting and integrating his
    papers on the philosophy of science (although there is still some
    repetition). Sokal’s clear thinking on difficult philosophical
    issues is always appreciated, but this time around I’m convinced
    that [he’s wrong about the Edinburgh
    set](http://qblog.aaronsw.com/post/1153051459/edinburgh-revisited).
    The rest of it is great, though, especially if you haven’t read it
    before. (There’s also some good newish stuff too, including some
    stuff about *Prophets Facing Backward*.)

100. *[Dancing in the Streets: A History of Collective
    Joy](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805057242)* by Barbara Ehrenreich

    Ehrenreich makes a convincing case for the ecstatic tradition in
    American life. My only regret is that it lacks a chapter on raves.

101. [The Mind-Body Problem](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0140172459) by
    Rebecca Goldstein

    A nice book about the problem with marrying a genius. See also: the
    film *Whatever Works*.

102. REDACTED

103. [The \$12 Million Stuffed Shark: The Curious Economics of
    Contemporary Art](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0230620590) by Don
    Thompson

    This is another book about a weird subject that goes into too much
    detail. Thompson gives a decent overview of the art market, but then
    spends too much time getting into obscure detail about the people
    involved. Modern art sure is weird, though.

104. [The Cartoon Introduction to
    Economics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0809094819) by Grady Klein
    and Yoram Bauman

    Funny (especially the intro) and some basic economics, but nothing
    stupendous on either front.

105. *[When Brute Force Fails](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691148643)*
    by Mark A. R. Kleiman

    A fantastic book. More gushing [in my
    review](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bruteforce).

106. [Money for Nothing](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1416597700) by John
    Gillespie and David Zweig

    A quick read on why corporate boards suck so very much.

107. [Ha’Penny](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0765358085) (2 of 3) by Jo
    Walton

108. [Half a Crown](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0765316218) (3 of 3) by
    Jo Walton

    A good fun detective story combined with interesting speculative
    fiction. (I read the first book, *Farthing*, years ago.)

109. [Reason and Rationality](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691139008) by
    Jon Elster

    Very, very short.

110. [An Object of Beauty](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0446573647) by
    Steve Martin

    More on the art market. Martin is not a bad novelist, considering
    everything else he is, but I doubt I would have read the book if it
    had a different author’s name on the cover.

111. [Shopgirl](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0786891076) by Steve Martin

    Turns out to be basically the same book, except much creepier since
    you realize Martin’s basically just using the book to work through
    his guilt about screwing over younger women.

112. *[Good to Great](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0066620996)* by Jim
    Collins

    Most business books consist of a bunch of wacky ideas dressed up
    with even wackier names and presented as the Next Big Thing. Jim
    Collins greatly improves the genre, by replacing the wacky ideas
    with actual science. (Unfortunately, he continues the tradition of
    wacky names.)

    Collins and his team picked out all Fortune 500 companies that
    sustained 4x market returns for more than 15 years (the great
    companies) and went back to find the transition point where they
    went from earning normal-market returns to their 4x returns. Then
    they found the most similar company at that transition point and
    used it as a control. They examined what differed between the great
    companies and the controls and describe it here. Of course, you have
    to trust Collins to pick out the right lessons, but the ones he
    chooses seem like very good ones.

113. [Good to Great and the Social
    Sector](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0977326403) by Jim Collins

    A short little appendix describing how to apply these principles to
    non-profits.

114. [Built to Last](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0060516402) by Jim
    Collins and Jerry Porras

    This book is very similar to *Good to Great* except it uses even
    worse science and even worse names. (Clock building? Really? Can’t
    we just call it institution building?) Just read *Good to Great* —
    the important stuff from this book is presented in its last chapter
    anyway.

115. Beyond Entrepreneurship by Jim Collins and William C. Lazier

    This book has pretty much no science (although fewer silly names as
    well). It’s just a lazier version of *Built to Last*.

116. [You Lost Me There](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1594487634) by
    Rosencrans Baldwin

    I knew Rosencrans had a novel out, but I was shocked to see it at
    the checkout counter. But it’s great!

117. Bigfoot: I Not Dead by Graham Roumieu

    Not funny.

118. [The Thick of It: The Missing DoSAC
    Files](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0571272541) by the writers of
    *The Thick of It*

    Not that funny. (*The Thick of It* is one of the top 5 great TV
    shows of all-time, though.)

119. *[The Lifecycle of Software
    Objects](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1596063173)*
    [[online](http://subterraneanpress.com/index.php/magazine/fall-2010/fiction-the-lifecycle-of-software-objects-by-ted-chiang/)]
    by Ted Chiang

    Read it! Even people who know much more about sci-fi than me agree
    this is one of the great science fiction books of all time. It’s a
    novel about the ethical issues with AI.

120. [Dr. Horrible and Other Horrible
    Stories](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1595825770) by Zack Whedon

    Definitely funny, though not as great as the show.

121. [Wrestling With Moses](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1400066743) by
    Anthony Flint

    A decent attempt at a biography of Jane Jacobs, though I would have
    wanted more detail on how she actually did what she did. Caro he is
    not — either in writing or research.

122. *[Short: Walking Tall When You’re Not Tall At
    All](http://books.theinfo.org/go/159643323X)* by John Schwartz

    Surely you’ve heard about the studies showing short people don’t
    make as much as tall people. John Schwartz set out to write a book
    to cheer kids up about this fact, but looking into them he found it
    wasn’t a fact at all. The result is a model of self-help through
    science and media criticism. Schwartz playfully teaches you enough
    math and science to be able to debunk the studies and enough
    personal advice to make a life on your own terms.

*Disclosures:* I know Rory Stewart, Dean Baker, John Schwartz, Ryan
Grim, Randall Munroe, and Charles Karelis. Baker and Karelis provided me
with free copies. Ryan Grim and John Schwartz have written about me in
other forums.

In the future, I think I should probably do this monthly instead of one
huge yearly installment.


My Twitter Viewer
=================

January 4, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/twitview)

* * * * *

I published this [on Twitter](http://twitter.com/aaronsw), but here’s a
blog post as well:

I made a little [Twitter viewer](http://twitter.theinfo.org/) that takes
a Tweet ID (you can find them in the URL of a tweet’s page on
twitter.com) and shows you the whole conversation for that tweet.

Some examples:

-   [Glenn Greenwald on the insurance
    file](http://twitter.theinfo.org/20496113098301440)
-   [The epic Ptacek-Kaminsky
    debate](http://twitter.theinfo.org/21994946588319745)
-   [Kevin Poulsen explains what’s not in the
    logs](http://twitter.theinfo.org/20293552433004544)

The idea is to a) make it easier to read these conversations, b) make it
easier to provide replies, c) provide a permanent link to what’s
becoming an increasingly-important conversation space.

Let me know what you think.


Squaring the Triangle: Secure, Decentralized, Human-Readable Names
==================================================================

January 6, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/squarezooko)

* * * * *

When using computers, we like to refer to things with names. For
example, this website is known as “www.aaronsw.com”. You can type that
into your browser and read these words. There are three big properties
we might want from such names:

-   **secure:** that when you type the name in you actually get my
    website and not the website of an imposter
-   **decentralized:** that no central authority controls all the names
-   **human-readable:** that the name is something you can actually
    remember instead of some long string of randomness

In a classic paper, my friend Zooko argued that you can get at most two
of these properties at any one time.

Recently, DNS legend Dan Kaminsky used this to argue that since
electronic cash was pretty much the same as naming, Zooko’s triangle
applied to it as well. He used this to argue that
[BitCoin](http://www.bitcoin.org/), the secure, decentralized,
human-meaningful electronic cash system was impossible. I have my
problems with BitCoin, but it’s manifestly not impossible, so I just
assumed Kaminsky had gone wrong somewhere.

But tonight I realized that you can indeed use BitCoin to square Zooko’s
triangle. Here’s how it works:

Let there be a document called the scroll. The scroll consists of a
series of lines and each line consists of a tuple (name, key, nonce)
such that the first N bits of the hash of the scroll from the beginning
to the end of a line are all zero. As a result, to add a line to the
scroll, you need to do enough computation to discover an appropriate
nonce that causes the bits of the hash to be zero.

To look up a name, you ask everyone you know for the scroll, trust
whichever scroll is the longest, and then start from the beginning and
take the key for the first line with the name you’re looking up. To
publish a name, you find an appropriate nonce and then send the new line
to everyone you know.

OK, let’s pause there for a second. How do you steal names in such a
system? First, you need to need to calculate a new nonce for the line
you want to steal and every subsequent line. Second, you need to get
your replacement scroll to the user. The first is difficult, but perhaps
not impossible, depending on how many lines ago the name you want to
steal is. It requires having some large multiple of the rest of the
network’s combined CPU power. This seems like a fairly strong constraint
to me, but apparently not to Dan. Luckily, we’re saved by the second
question.

Let there be a group of machines called the network. Each remembers the
last scroll it trusted. When a new valid line is created it’s sent to
everyone in the network and they add it to their scroll.^[1](#fn:fn1)^
Now stealing an old name is impossible, since machines in the network
only add new names, they don’t accept replacements for old ones.

That’s fine for machines already in the network, but how do you join?
Well, as a physical law, to join a network you need the identity of at
least one machine already in the network. Now when you join, that
machine can give you a fabricated scroll where they’ve stolen all the
names. I don’t think there’s any way to avoid this — if you don’t know
anyone willing to tell you the correct answer, you can’t will the
correct answer out of thin air. Even a centralized system depends on
knowing at least one honest root.

You can ameliorate this problem by knowing several nodes when you
connect and asking each of them for their scroll. It seems like the best
theoretically-possible case would be requiring only one node to be
honest. That would correspond to trusting whichever node had the longest
scroll. But this would leave you vulnerable to an attacker who a) has
enough CPU power to fabricate the longest scroll, and b) can co-opt at
least one of your initial nodes. The alternative is to trust only
scrolls you receive from a majority of your list of nodes. This leaves
you vulnerable to an attacker who can co-opt a majority of your initial
nodes. Which tradeoff you pick presumably depends on how much you trust
your initial nodes.

Publishing a false scroll is equivalent to fragmenting the namespace and
starting a separate network. (We can enforce this by requiring nodes to
sign each latest scroll and publish their signature to be considered
members-in-good-standing of the network. Any node that attempts to sign
two contradictory scroll is obviously duplicitous and can be
discounted.) So another way of describing scenario (b) is to say that to
join a network, you need a list of nodes where at least a majority are
actually nodes in the network. This doesn’t seem like an overly
strenuous requirement.

And we’re actually slightly safer than that, since the majority needs a
fair amount of CPU to stay plausible. If we assume that you hear new
names from some out-of-band source, for them to work on the attacker’s
network, the attacker must have enough CPU to generate lines for each
name you might use. Otherwise you realize that the names you type in on
your computer are returning 404s while they work on other people’s
computers and begin to realize you’ve been had by an attacker.

So there you have it. The names are secure: they’re identifiable by a
key of arbitrary length and cannot be stolen. They’re human-meaningful:
the name can be whatever string you like. And they’re decentralized: no
centralized authority determines who gets what name and yet they’re
available to everyone in the network.

Zooko’s triangle has been squared.

**UPDATE:** I’m gratified by all the feedback and I’ve put up [a
Frequently Asked Questions page](https://squaretriangle.jottit.com/faq)
in response to comments here and elsewhere.

* * * * *

1.  What happens if two people create a new line at the same time? The
    debate should be resolved by the creation of the next new line —
    whichever line is previous in its scroll is the one to
    trust. [↩](#fnref:fn1)




Individuals in a World of Science
=================================

April 6, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/individualscience)

* * * * *

We are all the same, we are all different—this is the great modern
dilemma. At the same time science and technology lets us see our
patterns (guess what books we’ll like without ever meeting us, predict
the probability with which a certain drug will have a certain side
effect) our social independence encourages us to believe we cannot be so
easily controlled (thus millions of people watching the same TV ad
insisting they “think different”).

The tension can be felt most acutely in medicine, where a long and
storied tradition of individualism (each patient is unique, with their
own symptoms and history and makeup) confronts the most expensive
products of modern megascience (every pill of a drug is the same, its
workings validated through a test on thousands of people). And then you
have doctors, caught in the middle: what are they to be—brilliant
individuals, cunningly solving problems on their own (or, more
realistically, with a small team) or dutiful cogs, administering the
treatments shown most effective by large experiments?

For every individual person, you can come up with a story about why the
larger results may not apply (most of the people in that study were
young and healthy, but you are old and frail). But that just replaces
hard science with educated suspicion. On the whole what was proven true
on the whole must work better, right?

This is the position of evidence-based medicine, which says that doctors
can’t be trusted to make these decisions by themselves. Unduly swayed by
whim and bias, bribed in endless ways by the manufacturers of expensive
drugs and tools, incentivized to give themselves more business, EBM
proponents say we must take these choices out of their hands and give
them to a panel of experts, who can review with time and distance what
solid scientific studies say actually works and does not.

I’ve made it sound like I’m on the side of the scientific mass, but I’m
really not. Is there any evidence that evidence-based medicine really
works? Everything I’ve seen is shockingly inconclusive.

There have been big benefits from smaller interventions—giving doctors
tools to encourage them to do the right things. Atul Gawande has been
the greatest chronicler of such programs, from forceful [reminders to
wash your hands](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312427654) to careful
[checklists before surgery](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0312430000). But
for the most part such programs aid doctors, not overrule them. This is
good politics, but it’s also good science: everyone rebels against
direct instruction.

I think we have a choice to make. Doctors can be simply told what to
do—in which case, why require all those years of med school? why not
write down all the rules and instructions and let any random nurse
follow them?—or they can be taught the lessons of the science but
allowed to practice it on their own. They can be show their own human
frailties and biases, the huge value that comes from following the
proven rules, trained in the common fallacies of probability
andstatistics, but in the end, allowed to make the final judgment for
themselves. We can screen out those who fail to learn these lessons, but
if we can’t, at the end of the process, trust them to make their own
decisions, why even bother to have doctors at all?

* * * * *

Medicine is the field where this is clearest, but the same tension has
come to teaching as well—every student is the same, every student is
different. We once allowed each teacher to direct their classroom in
their own way, but high-stakes tests and “value-added” measurements now
force all of them into the same mold.

Isn’t this a good thing, demands Matt Yglesias? We have science that
shows good teaching can make a huge difference in people’s lives—doesn’t
everyone deserve the benefits that come from having a good teacher? He
dismisses the stories of the individual horrors that result from this
process as mere anecdote—inevitably in imposing a one-size-fits-all
solution there will be some negative side effects for a few, but the
benefits for the many outweigh the costs. Again, I have tried to put
this position in its most favorable light (I hope Matt will correct me
if I’ve failed) but I’m flabbergasted by its callous naiveté. The
problem with allowing hard incentive systems to squeeze out individual
judgment is inevitably that people begin trying to game the system—they
cheat on the tests, they coach students on the answers, they cut recess
and art for more drill-and-skill. To dismiss [the on-the-ground
evidence](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088024) of how badly these
tests hurt kids, in favor of some Olympian view of the benefits of
rising test scores, is ludicrous when the on-the-ground view is telling
you *the test scores are actually bogus*.

Fine, Matt says, that just means we need to crack down on cheating.
(This is always the first response of the incentive designer—we just
need to improve the incentive system!) The fact that a couple teachers
cheat on their students’ tests is no reason to give up on all the
benefits better teachers can being. And that’s true, but blatant
cheating is just the tip of the iceberg.

In medicine, we can at least measure whether people get healthy. A
doctor with some radical new treatment can prove she’s right by testing
it against the previous best answer and showing it works better. And we
want brilliant teachers to do the same: to come up with innovative new
ways of teaching students and prove they work better than the old stale
system. But the ultimate goal of school is much less clear and more
disputed—is it to create orderly little capitalist worker bees or
curious independent thinkers?

Matt says *please, we don’t need to enter into this debate. I’m only
talking about the fundamentals—basic literacy and arithmetic.* But I
don’t think that really helps. What good is learning to read if, by the
end, you hate doing it?

One solution is to measure students by real results, rather than
artificial tests. Can a child read and understand? Ask them to tell you
about the books they’ve read lately. (This was how my library’s summer
reading program tested whether you actually read the books you claimed.
Apparently I didn’t understand most of *Snow Crash* as a kid, but I
loved reading it anyway.) Or, better yet, ask them a question that
involves doing some research and see if they can look up and read the
answer.

For math, ask them to build something that involves a little
calculation, or make change, or any of the real-world activities these
isolated skills are supposed to be actually useful for. What you learn
from that will be much more revealing than which bubbles kids fill in on
a sheet.

The other alternative is to put your trust in teachers, to assume they
can tell the difference between a class that’s learning and a class that
isn’t, and then give them a chance to do better. Take them to some of
the best-run classes in the world and let them absorb the lessons for
themselves. Have them meet regularly with their fellow teachers and
discuss how they can make their teaching better. This is the humane
response to those who want to reduce teaching to a rote question of
merely reading off a script (no joke—this is literally what happens in
the most test-driven schools…because, after all, science shows the
script is best for test scores).

In both cases, I sympathize with the humane aims: I don’t want doctors
to become shills for pharmaceutical companies, I don’t want poor kids to
grow up unable to read. But I blanch at the inhumane means proposed to
carry them out. As *[Seeing Like a
State](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0300078153)* describes, the history
of high modernist utopian projects has not been a pretty one. The quest
for policy designers, then, is how to promote huge positive changes
without crushing the individuals involved underfoot.


New Homepage
============

June 22, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newhomepage)

* * * * *

Sorry for the quiet here, but I’ve [updated my home
page](http://www.aaronsw.com/) for the first time in five years. Take a
look at it if you’re looking for basic background info on me.

Also, we’ve been doing regular blogging over at [the Demand Progress
Blog](http://blog.demandprogress.org/) so you may want to check that for
interesting new things instead.


Goods, Services, and Delegations
================================

July 18, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/delegation)

* * * * *

Things you can buy are typically divided into tangible things (goods)
and intangible actions (services). But recently I’ve realized there’s a
much more interesting type of thing to buy: delegations.

A delegation is like a service, except instead of asking someone to do a
specific thing, you ask them to achieve some goal. Hiring someone to
paint your wall white would be a service, hiring someone to make your
house pretty is a delegation.

Delegations are a *lot* harder than services. In the same way you can be
pretty sure that when you buy a pen it will write, you can be pretty
sure that when you hire someone to paint your wall white, she’ll
actually do it. And if she doesn’t, you can just not pay her.

But if you want to hire an interior designer, it’s a mess. Let’s say you
pick one by looking through their portfolio and concluding that you like
their work. But when they come to design your place, you hate the
result. What can you do? You say that what you got looks nothing like
the stuff in the portfolio and they’ll just say that every space is
different and so has a different result. There’s no way to ever prove
they did a bad job.

And that’s something fairly inconsequential. Imagine you’re [wrongly
charged with
murder](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/09/07/090907fa_fact_grann)
or stricken with a potentially-fatal illness. Picking the right lawyer
or doctor could make the difference between life and death.

But now there’s not even a portfolio for you to look at. Sure, you can
see if the lawyer’s won a lot of cases or if the doctor’s kept most of
her patients alive, but that doesn’t tell you much — it probably just
means they’re either very lucky or mostly choose easy cases.

Perhaps instead of looking at outcomes, you could look at the decisions
they made along the way. But even if you could get your hands on those
records, how could you possibly learn enough about law or medicine to
evaluate them? And even if you somehow tried, there’s probably all sorts
of relevant specific details about the circumstances that could never
make it into even the most detailed histories.

But it’s not just hard for the delegator — for the same reason, it’s
hard for the delegatee. If you want to be great at painting walls white,
it’s easy to get pretty immediate feedback about whether you did the job
correctly. But if you’re a elementary school teacher, you’ll really just
never know. You hope you’re helping your kids succeed in life, but
there’s no way for you to check that. And what are the chances that you
started doing everything right just by intuition?

No, the expert performance movement has shown the only way to get really
good at something is to practice, continually comparing what you did
against the results it achieved. But in any sort of delegated job this
is practically impossible: the uncertainties are too great, the feedback
loops take too long, the opportunities to practice much too rare.

Traditionally, we solve these problems by having an academic discipline
figure out the right thing to do using scale. If doctors were just on
their own, they’d still be no better than witch doctors: people would
come in with problems and they’d pick a random herb or spell to try and
pray it made the patient feel better. They’d never really know whether
they were helping or hurting. But they’re not on their own: because
medical schools can conduct randomized trials with hundreds of people,
they can just read the results and learn what actually works.

A lot is still left to individual judgment — there’s not a medical study
for every scenario and even if there was, you’d still have to choose how
to interpret the results — but there is definitely a trend toward
knowing more. And some of the most exciting developments in medicine
come from replacing human judgment with
[checklists](http://gawande.com/the-checklist-manifesto) and [decision
trees](http://www.venchar.com/2005/02/emphasizing_the.html).

But medicine is probably the best-case scenario. I’ve never heard of
lawyers reading up on the results of [statistical
trials](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/notrocketscience/2011/04/11/justice-is-served-but-more-so-after-lunch-how-food-breaks-sway-the-decisions-of-judges/)
and aesthetics is so subjective and fashion so temporary that I doubt
anything like this could ever be possible for interior designers.
(Education is probably somewhere in the middle.) How do people ever get
good at these things?

* * * * *

Part of why running a nonprofit is so hard is that pretty much all
nonprofits are delegation. Donors aren’t buying a particular thing they
know they want, they’re buying a chance to help others, without knowing
exactly what it is *they* want. And that’s why [randomized controlled
trials](http://www.povertyactionlab.org/about-j-pal) have been
transformational for the nonprofit sector — they’ve converted a
delegation into a service. [Great nonprofits](http://www.givewell.org/)
don’t have to guess at what will help people the most; they just need to
look up the most helpful service and then purchase more of it.

*[Poor Economics](http://pooreconomics.com/)* is a remarkable book if
only because it shows how crucial this is. It’s full of tales of
small-scale experiments where well-intentioned do-gooders try hard to
help some people and fail catastrophically. But they only notice because
there are academics there collecting data; in the typical nonprofit,
where the decisionmakers are far removed from the evidence on the
ground, they’d probably never know that much was going wrong ([assuming
that they even
cared](http://byliner.com/originals/three-cups-of-deceit)).

But “political” nonprofits don’t get off so easily. It’s fairly
impractical to do randomized controlled trials of things like lobbying,
public campaigning, white papers, investigative journalism, public
relations, strategic litigation, electoral campaigns, and the rest.
There are [brave and noble
efforts](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/31/magazine/31politics-t.html?pagewanted=all)
to try to improve some of the details most amenable to testing, but
while you can test which direct mail flyer makes people more likely to
vote, it’s hard to test whether GOTV mail is a good use of campaign
funds at all.

Now you can get a lot out of [combining all these
things](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ist) so you can make big-picture
decisions about how to allocate resources. And you can get a lot out of
having the same team do them over and over so they can build up
institutional expertise. But there’s also a lot of room for learning
within each one as well. Just as randomized controlled trials have
revolutionized development nonprofits, I think political nonprofits will
be revolutionized by developing institutional structures to formalize
the process of learning from campaigns.

What would this look like? A good first step would be developing a
series of case studies of major campaigns, successful or unsuccessful,
to get some sense of big picture stories. From this, you could distill a
toolbook of various tactics, with some notes on which seem to be more
and less effective and some open questions or avenues of exploration for
each. Then within each tactic, you could bring together practitioners to
swap best practices and try to improve the state of the art.

Interviewing people right after campaigns also seems like a fruitful
avenue. As they look back on what happened, what do they see as the big
mistakes? The big successes? What do they wish they’d had?

These might all seem like minor, parochial concerns, but when you stop
to realize that the world is full of huge problems that can only be
solved by collective action, figuring out how to inspire coordinated
action most effectively doesn’t just seem interesting — it seems
essential.


Watch That Space
================

July 18, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/updates)

* * * * *

There’s a major statement [at the Demand Progress
blog](http://demandprogress.org/aaron).


How Apple Works
===============

July 22, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/howappleworks)

* * * * *

Who takes over for Steve Jobs?^[1](#fn:f1)^[John Gruber recently
posted](http://daringfireball.net/2011/07/succeeding_steve_jobs) his
argument for thinking it will be COO Tim Cook. The biggest point in
Cook’s favor is simple: “He’s already run the company while Jobs has
been on leave.” That’s true, but it’s less meaningful than it sounds.
But to understand why, you need to understand how Apple works.

In the same way that Google is a company driven by engineering or Amazon
is driven by operations, Apple is driven by taste. Here’s how Apple
products are created: a team of designers decide exactly what a product
should do and how it should look and feel, their work is ruthlessly
edited by Steve until he approves, and then the entire rest of the
company is given the task of moving mountains to make that dream real.

Tim Cook is in charge of that third step. And he’s done a masterful job
of it, accomplishing endless miracles never been seen by the public.
Apple engineers have invented entirely new chips to fit the specified
processing power into the tiny cases required by the spec; they build
entirely new factories with entirely new production processes just to
perfectly match the shade of pink in the original design; they’ve
created a revolution in logistics to ensure these amazing products get
into customers’ hands on launch day. Cook runs this process, and there’s
no doubt he’s brilliant at it.

But it’s about fulfilling Jobs’ dreams, not forging new ones. He can
continue to run the company while Jobs is away because he’s continuing
to ensure the execution of designs that Jobs has already approved. But
Apple can’t run indefinitely on old plans. The only reason it works for
Cook to be in charge while Steve is away is because Steve is still
around, doing ruthless critiques of yet-to-be-invented products from his
sickbed.

The only person with the credibility to helm Apple in the long run is a
person who can do those critiques. And for all Cook’s brilliance, I’ve
seen no evidence he’s a master of great taste. His creativity is at
achieving a predetermined goal, not about deciding what goal to achieve.

As Gruber says, whoever takes Steve’s place will be someone already at
Apple. Not just because all the other options are absurd, but because
Steve has spent the past decade or so carefully training his top
lieutenants about how to do every aspect of his job. It makes no sense
to hire from outside that elite group. But within that group, there’s
only one person who makes any sense as tastemaker-in-chief: Jony Ive.

This becomes obvious if you just watch the keynotes. Steve Jobs is well
known for raising the product keynote to an art form. But the others who
have taken over the speaking job in recent years — Scott Forstall, Phil
Schiller, Tim Cook — seem like clumsy kids trying to fill the shoes of
the master. There’s only one person at Apple who gives talks with the
elegance and style of Steve: Jony Ive.

Now the big criticism of Ive is that while he is clearly one of the most
brilliant industrial designers in the world, he’s shown no aptitude for
software design. It’s hard to know whether this is true. The [Mobile
Design Awards credited
Ive](http://arstechnica.com/apple/news/2008/07/jonathan-ive-takes-home-mda-award-for-iconic-iphone-design.ars)
with the iPhone’s user interface, but [the
patent](http://www.google.com/patents/about/7479949_Touch_screen_device_method_and_g.html?id=dCKzAAAAEBAJ)
credits Jobs and Forstall and a dozen others, but not Ive.

But even if Ive never designed a piece of software in his life, it’d be
beside the point. I can’t imagine Jobs has either. What’s needed atop
Apple is not creative brilliance — they have a design department full of
that — but editorial taste. Like [the director of a
film](http://kottke.org/11/07/a-day-in-the-life-of-john-lasseter),
Apple’s CEO needs to go through the thousands of creative ideas
developed within Apple and decide which ones should be approved for
production and which ones need to sent back for more work.

It’s impossible to imagine Apple functioning without this role. (Would
Apple splinter and start developing all sorts of random unapproved
products like Google under Eric Schmidt?) It’s impossible to imagine Tim
Cook filling this role. (How can he be tastemaker for the whole company
if he can’t even pull off a decent keynote?) And it’s impossible to
imagine this role being anywhere but at the top of the org chart. (It’d
be like crediting a film to the producer instead of the director.)

No, if Apple is to continue, it will be with a tastemaker at the top.
And there are no serious candidates besides Ive.

* * * * *

1.  This piece was written before Steve stepped down as CEO, but I think
    it still stands. I mean when Steve really leaves: it seems obvious
    that even as “Chairman of the Board” rather than CEO, he’s still
    tastemaker-in-chief at Apple. [↩](#fnref:f1)




Understanding Groupon Means Understanding ACSOI
===============================================

August 18, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/acsoi)

* * * * *

Imagine you started a business that delivered people a box of cereal
each week. Each week they pay you, you take their money and buy a box of
cereal and some shipping, and keep what’s left over. You learn that the
average new customer brings in \$50 in profit over their lifetime, so
you decide to spend some of that money to get new customers — say, by
buying [web ads](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/adlogic).

With web ads, you can say exactly how much you want to spend for each
new customer. Now the future isn’t necessarily like the past — things
could go wrong — but it seems safe to, say, spend \$5 to get a new
customer. If the future is like the past, you’ll make \$45 each time you
do this. And even if future customers are only half as good as current
ones, you’ll still be making \$20 each time you do this!

How much money should you spend on marketing? Well, others have started
to notice you making money hand-over-fist and have decided to start
competing. Best to get people hooked on your service than on theirs,
right? And each dollar you spend now is going to bring in ten times
later, so it’d be crazy not to spend everything you could, right? You’re
only making \$10 million a year right now o you get your investors to
put in another \$100 million and quickly spend it all on marketing.

Now by traditional accounting standards, you’re \$90 million in the red.
But that seems like a misleading way to count. After all, if you stopped
marketing tomorrow you’d have a nice, profitable \$10 million a year
business. Instead it makes sense to look at the \$10 million dollars a
year you’re making on the one hand and your aggressive expansion plan
(in particular, how much it costs to get a new customer and the lifetime
value expected from a new customer) on the other.

This, as best as I can tell, was the story of Groupon. They called that
first number (the business you have now, aside from the expansion
attempt) ACSOI.

But the press didn’t seem to understand any of this. Groupon was
pilloried for playing accounting games that turned a huge loss into a
moderate profit. And when, in response, Groupon took the ACSOI numbers
out of their prospectus, it was hailed as a victory over fraudulent
accounting.

Which all strikes me as ridiculous. Groupon didn’t hide the fact that
they were losing money by traditional accounting standards. They said so
up front, but then provided the additional data that they use
internally. Just some additional information, no pressure: “While we
track this management metric internally to gauge our performance, we
encourage you to base your investment decision on whatever metrics make
you comfortable,” they said. How does taking this information out of the
prospectus help anyone?

Now there are valid questions about this model. Perhaps the future won’t
be like the past, perhaps Groupon’s cost-per-acquisition is way too
high, perhaps trying to grow so fast is risky. Or maybe Groupon is
presenting misleading ACSOI numbers and even if they stopped all
marketing today they’d still be losing money. I’d genuinely like to
know. But the discussion needs to start with understanding what they’re
saying, not just pretending they’re making stuff up.


What Does Google Mean by “Evil”?
================================

August 22, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil)

* * * * *

Pretty much ever since Paul Buchheit suggested “Don’t be evil” as a
corporate values statement (and Amit Patel begun writing it on
whiteboards around the office), any time Google does something people
don’t like, they begin calling it “evil” and complaining that Google is
violating its prime directive.

But surely “evil” means something more than just “wrong” or “bad”. If
the girl across the street peers through your window to watch you
undress, we might say that was bad and wrong and awful, but I don’t
think anyone would try to claim it was evil. Evil is a really strong
term!

Now part of the joke is that Google seems to be using it rather loosely.
If you look at [their
examples](http://www.google.com/about/corporate/company/tenthings.html)
of evil deeds, they seem rather mundane compared to cackling
supervillains and mass murderers. They specifically name three: showing
irrelevant ads, using pop-ups or other annoying gimmicks, and selling
off actual search results.

Hardly the stuff of comic books. But what do these three have in common?
**They’re all instances of refusing to make things worse for your users
in order to make more money.** Perhaps that still seems like a mundane
conception of evil, but I think it gets at something important. Evil
isn’t just about doing terrible things — it’s about doing terrible
things for bad reasons. The evil villain cackles and brags about how
they’re on the side of evil — they explicitly oppose doing good. And
this definition of evil is all about that: if you’re working against
your own users, you must have crossed the line and joined the other
side.

When you stop to think about it, it’s wild how many companies have done
just that: Printer manufacturers who put chips on their ink cartridges,
so you can’t refill or recycle them but instead have to buy a new
full-price cartridge. Apple preventing the Kindle app from having any
sort of ebook buying functionality. Web publishers who break articles up
into 20 pages so that you have to load 20 different ads just to read one
article. These are pretty banal evils, but it’s striking that I can’t
think of any example where Google has done anything like that. (Perhaps
someone will name one I’ve missed in the comments.)

There are lots of things I disagree with Google about — the most recent
being their refusal to [let my friends with chosen
names](http://my.nameis.me/) use Google+ — but those things aren’t evil
by this definition. For example, Google
[defends](http://www.jwz.org/blog/2011/08/nym-wars/) their real names
policy by saying it’ll lead to better conversations. They still claim to
be fighting for the user.

So if you want to argue with Google, that’s the way to do it: don’t say
that they’re hurting someone out there in the world or violating some
rule or principle, say that what they’re doing isn’t serving their
users. Because that’s the line Google’s afraid to cross.

*Thanks to Kragen Sitaker for
[discussions](http://lists.canonical.org/pipermail/kragen-discuss/2011-August/001176.html)
that inspired this post.*

**UPDATE:** [Chris Soghoian
observes](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c8) Google refuses to
add Do-Not-Track support to its browsers or servers in order to maximize
ad profits. [Scott Teresi
suggests](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c10) Google’s refusal
to provide customer support (in order to save money) qualifies. [Tom
Slee reminds me](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c19) of their
infamous net neutrality deal with Verizon. [John Gruber
argues](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2011/08/23/swartz-google-evil)
that having ads at all is evil in this sense. [Mark Heath points
to](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c33) those infuriating
YouTube ads.


A Better Travel Guide for Geeks
===============================

September 4, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bettertravel)

* * * * *

Pretty much anywhere you go, you can find some pretty scenery, a
charming hotel, some decent restaurants, a couple of interesting
museums. And the goal of most travel guides seems to be to tell you
about these things. The result is a rather boring sort of tourism in
which everywhere feels pretty much like everywhere else.

What I want is a travel guide that highlights the things that are
absolutely different about this place than anywhere else you might go —
the things you can’t see anywhere else. For my hometown of Cambridge, it
might be the window displays on Main St. that explain how to sequence
DNA, or the architectural marvels of
[Stata](http://web.mit.edu/facilities/construction/completed/stata.html),
[BCS](http://web.mit.edu/facilities/construction/completed/bcs.html),
and
[Simmons](http://web.mit.edu/facilities/construction/completed/simmons.html).
In Boston, maybe it’s the
[Athenæum](https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Boston_Athen%C3%A6um)
or the [*Globe* factory tour](https://twitpic.com/3djvad). In West
Virginia, maybe it’s going to see mountaintop removal or some
back-to-the-land communes.

And maybe the right thing to do is to head somewhere else. Normal
guidebooks are separated out by city and state, so if the coolest thing
in Boston is actually to commute up to Providence, you’d never hear
about it. But you’d put this guidebook on the Internet, so you’d give it
your location and it’d tell you what was awesome nearby no matter what
political jurisdiction it happened to be in.

Anyone know anything like that?

**Related things:** Ben Goldacre’s list of [Nerdy Day
Trips](https://bengoldacre.posterous.com/nerdy-day-trips-tell-us-about-yours-well-buil)
in the UK. jgc’s [Geek Atlas](http://www.geekatlas.com/) lists cool
science and technology places. [Atlas Obscura](http://atlasobscura.com/)
lists curiosities. [WikiTravel](http://wikitravel.org/en/Main_Page) lets
you add places of your own. I’m told Lonely Planet has some stuff like
this. *[Smile When You’re
Lying](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805082093)* is an amusing account of
the distortionary forces on the average travel guide.


Revolutions on the Internet
===========================

November 1, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/internetrev)

* * * * *

I hate to wade into such a sterile debate as whether social media helps
revolutions, but I made a point about it recently at a conference and
people seemed to like it, so I thought I’d put it up here for posterity.

Jon Elster has a four-phase theory of revolutions:^[1](#fn:fn1)^

1.  A hard-core of committed activists get together to do something
    completely crazy.

2.  The regime cracks down, attracting people who are sympathetic to the
    cause to rally to the support of the crazy ones.

3.  As the protests grow, it seems like they might have a reasonable
    chance of succeeding and it seems worth it even for just normal
    reasonable people to start joining in.

4.  The protests become so overwhelmingly large that even their
    opponents pretend to be part of them, so as not to be on the wrong
    side of history.

It seems pretty clear that the Internet helps with 1 — after all, it’s
brought together groups of crazy committed people about every other
topic, from *Smallville* slash fiction to high-energy astrophysics. It’d
be very surprising if it didn’t bring committed activists together too.

It’s clearly helped with 2 — YouTube videos of protestors being
mistreated by police have been a staple of the \#occupy movement, even
though they haven’t gotten much coverage on traditional TV; We are all
Khaled Said presumably reached some people in Egypt.

3 and 4 are when the cable news and satellite television stations start
joining in and when people support the protest just because it’s such a
huge physical presence in their lives. Here, I agree, the Internet
probably has less effect.

The problem is that you never get to 3 and 4 without 1 and 2 — I don’t
think it’s a total accident that all of these protests are happening
now. I think they’re happening because 1 and 2 have been made much
easier thanks to the Internet. It’s just that most people don’t hear
about them until steps 3 and 4, which are carried much more by
traditional media. They suffer from the understandable fallacy that just
because they heard about it on TV, that must be how everyone else did.

* * * * *

1.  Outlined in the preface to his book *[Political
    Psychology](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521422868)* (Cambridge;
    1993). [↩](#fnref:fn1)




Apple and the Kindle
====================

November 3, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kindledetails)

* * * * *

The Amazon Kindle is full of all sorts of amazing, delightful touches —
the sort of thing you’d expect from an Apple product. For example, when
you first take your Kindle out of its (gorgeous!) box, it boots right up
knowing your name and logged into your account. This is actually
out-Apple-ing Apple: it’s possible because Amazon not only controls the
hardware and the software, but the entire distribution channel; they
know exactly who is going to get each Kindle.

And think about how the original Kindle came with a *lifetime*
*unlimited* *worldwide* data plan. Imagine how much that must have cost!
All so that you never had to think about syncing again: your Kindle was
automatically synced, no matter where it was in the world.

Bezos must have spent tons of energy getting this stuff right. And he
must be sitting there, pissed, that Steve Jobs gets all these laurels
while no one ever recognizes the stuff he’s done. But I don’t think
that’s because Jobs is a better marketer and showman than Bezos (that’s
the easy way out); it’s because the small details that delight get
buried under small details that annoy.

For example, if you download a sample of a book and get to the end and
decide to purchase the whole thing, the sample doesn’t expand to
download the remainder of the book — instead the full book downloads
completely separately and you have to manually copy over all your
highlights and annotations to the full one. (You can’t just keep them in
the sample because sample’s don’t even sync; you have to download a
sample manually to each of your devices and hand-synchronize the page
numbers.)

Or (and this is incredibly aggravating) when you select a word in the
Kindle, depending on how common a word it is, the option that comes up
highlighted by default is either “full definition” or “start highlight”.
Since e-ink’s refresh rate is so slow, you typically don’t see what’s
actually come up until you’ve pressed the button for the second time. So
I often “double click” on words to highlight them, but some percentage
of the time this kicks me over into the dictionary and I have to hit
back twice to get out.

And this is all before I’ve even got to the disastrous incompatibilities
between the Kindle device, the Kindle for Mac app, the Kindle for iOS
app, the Kindle Online Reader (read.amazon.com), and the
kindle.amazon.com social network — all of which are full of gruesome
interface annoyances of their own.

That’s the thing about delightful details: they’re not just another
thing you can add on top. Unless you sweat the details all the way
through the user experience, the ones that delight quickly get drowned
out by the ones that constantly annoy. I hope someone at Amazon will
take that to heart.


Steve Jobs and the Founder’s Pain
=================================

November 3, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stevepain)

* * * * *

After reading the new biography *Steve Jobs*, the person I most identify
with is Jony Ive. Ive and Jobs became close friends and collaborators,
but Ive, “so instinctively nice,” found himself puzzled about how his
good friend could be so mean:

> He’s a very, very sensitive guy. That’s one of the things that makes
> his antisocial behavior, his rudeness, so unconscionable. I can
> understand why people who are thick-skinned and unfeeling can be rude,
> but not sensitive people. […And] because of how very sensitive he is,
> he knows exactly how to efficiently and effectively hurt someone. And
> he does do that. (462)

Steve’s fits are legendary. “He would shout at a meeting, ‘You asshole,
you never do anything right,’” recalls his director of finance, Debi
Coleman. “It was like an hourly occurrence.” (124) “This is shit!” he
yelled after seeing the first draft of the “Here’s to the crazy ones”
ad. “It’s advertising agency shit and I hate it.” (329)

> Something was either “the best thing ever,” or it was shitty,
> brain-dead, inedible. …Any perceived flaw could set off a rant. The
> finish on a piece of metal, the curve on the head of a screw, the
> shade of blue on a box, the intuitiveness of a navigation screen—he
> would declare them to “completely suck” until that moment when he
> suddenly pronounced them “absolutely perfect.” (561)

One way of reading this is that Steve Jobs is just a sociopath, someone
who knows exactly where people’s weaknesses are and plays on them
masterfully until they do exactly, precisely what he wants, without
little concern about human consequences.

But there’s another, more sympathetic reading. I think Jobs really did
feel this way. He had such an intense aesthetic sense that even
something as minor as the curve on the head of the screw could cause him
enormous pain. And, like anyone in pain, he responded by lashing out at
the people around him. There are some people who, when they’re insulted,
can’t resist punching the person who insulted them. Steve wasn’t much
for physical violence, but when something looked off to him, he couldn’t
help screaming.

I sympathize because I can see this in myself. Something that’s perfect
just feels much, much better than something that’s almost right. When
I’m doing something myself, I can just sit there and work at it until
it’s *exactly* right. It’s embarrassing to launch a product with a bug
in it! It physically hurts when I realize that’s what I’ve done. But as
projects and companies grow, there are more and more people in between
me and those tiny details. And then I face a choice: do I keep
complaining until something’s perfect or do I just let go and consider
it somebody else’s problem?

Steve never let go. He continued to feel that founder’s pain about
everything in his life. When it was his project, he’d make people stay
late until they got it right. When it was his company, he’d go right to
the person responsible, even if they were 5 levels down in the org
chart, and make them fix it. (“After looking at a bunch of screenshots,
Jobs jumped up, grabbed a marker, and drew a simple rectangle on a
whiteboard. ‘Here’s the new application,’ he said. ‘It’s got one window.
You drag your video into the window. Then you click the button that says
“Burn.” That’s it.’” (382))

In fact, it didn’t matter whose company it was. He once sent his
fresh-squeezed juice back to the kitchen three times in a row until they
got it right (527); when his cable box was frustrating him, he called
the CEO of Comcast. (“I thought he was calling to say something nice
about it,” the CEO recalled. “Instead, he told me ‘It sucks.’” (489))

And that’s why I like Jony Ive. He too clearly feels that pain (he once
insisted they hold up an entire product launch because he didn’t like
the polish on the screws) but he doesn’t lash out at people about it.
Instead, he sits down with the people involved and works to fix the
problem until they get it just right.

Ask Jobs about his viciousness and he insisted it was all for the best:
“I’ve learned over the years that when you have really good people you
don’t have to baby them…A-plus players like to work together, and they
don’t like it if you tolerate B work. Ask any member of that Mac team.
They will tell you it was worth the pain.” Even Debi Coleman agreed: “I
consider myself the absolute luckiest person in the world to have worked
with him.”

But does it require so much pain? My hope is that I can be just as
exacting, demand work just as good, without emotionally destroying
people in the process. I want to be a perfectionist *and* a nice guy. I
want to be Jony Ive. I hope it works — for my sake, and Apple’s.

*Thanks to Ben Wikler for suggesting this post.*


Election Ballot 2011
====================

November 8, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/election2011)

* * * * *

It’s like [2009 all over
again](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/election09).

Everyone seems to have moved to the middle since last time — the decent
candidates have descended into vague blandness; the terrible have begun
spouting the same rhetoric. But, fortunately, this time there’s a
candidate I actually quite like: Matt Nelson sounds awesome. **Vote Matt
Nelson.**

1.  Matt Nelson (grassroots organizing, pedestrian H\^2)
2.  Larry Ward (inclusionary zoning)
3.  Kenneth E. Reeves (Harlem Children’s Zone)
4.  Sam Seidel (bikes, TOD)
5.  Leland Cheung (simplify regulation, bike share)
6.  Minka vanBeuzekom (smart growth)
7.  Marjorie Decker (no CCTV, banning trans fats)
8.  Charles Marquardt (planning, sustainability)
9.  James M. Williamson (no corporate money, slow development)
10. Tim Toomey (vagueness, fuel efficient vehicles)
11. David Maher (consensus building)
12. Henrietta Davis (healthy kids, green buildings)
13. E. Denise Simmons (bus shelters)
14. Tom Stohlman (do nothing)
15. Gary Mello (cut spending, insurance reform)
16. Gregg Moree (crazy blandness)
17. Pascual (psychic reform, poetry)
18. Craig Kelley (traffic enforcement, not campaigning)

School issues are inevitably depressing. Everyone says they oppose the
achievement gap and so on, so, again, my first test was to see how
people felt about standardized tests (ordered from opposition to
support):

1.  Alice Turkel (portfolios, high quality preschool)
2.  Nancy Tauber (no teaching to the test)
3.  Bill Forster (stop teaching to the test)
4.  Marc McGovern (alternative assessments)
5.  Patty Nolan (no more tests)
6.  Richard Harding (not a fan, but it has its benefits)
7.  John Holland (might interfere)
8.  Joyce Gerber (dodged the question)
9.  Mervan Osborne (dodged)
10. Charles Stead, Sr. (tight ship principal)
11. Fred Fantini (more assessment)

Happy Election Day!


On Intellectual Dishonesty
==========================

December 14, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intellectualdishonesty)

* * * * *

Dishonesty has two parts: 1) saying something that is untrue, and 2)
saying it with the intent to mislead the other person. You can have each
without the other: you can be genuinely mistaken and thereby say
something false without intending to mislead, and you can intentionally
mislead someone without ever saying anything that’s untrue. (The second
is generally considered deceit, but not dishonesty.)

However, you can be intellectually dishonest without doing *either* of
these things. Imagine that you’re conducting an experiment and most of
the time it comes out exactly the way you expect but one time it goes
wrong (you probably just screwed up the measurements). Telling someone
about your work, you say: “Oh, it works just the way I expected — seven
times it came out exactly right.”

This isn’t untrue and it isn’t intentionally misleading — you really do
believe it works the way you expected. But it is intellectually
dishonest: intellectual honesty requires bending-over-backwards to
provide any evidence that you might be wrong, *even if you’re convinced
that you are right*.

This is an impractical standard to apply to everyday life. A prospective
employer asks you in a job interview if you can get to work on time. You
say “Yes”, not “I think so, but one time in 2003 the power went out and
so my alarm didn’t go off and I overslept”. I don’t think anyone
considers this dishonesty; indeed, if you were intellectually honest all
the time people would think you were pretty weird.

Science has a higher standard. It’s not just between you and your
employer, it’s a claim to posterity. And you might be wrong, but what if
you’re not around for posterity to call you up and ask you to show your
work? That’s why intellectual honesty requires you show your work in
advance, so that others can see if you’re missing something.


When will experiences replace movie theaters?
=============================================

February 14, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/experiences)

* * * * *

When I was a kid, I remember my school putting on a production of *Peter
Pan*. For the dramatic flying scenes, they rigged a special harness that
would go under Pan’s costume and hoist him around the stage. But what I
remember most is sitting outside the theater, desperately wishing it was
me who got to fly. I knew I had a long life ahead of me, but when do
grownups get to fly as if by magic?

The world is weirdly disappointing that way. Billions of dollars are
spent making and watching people explore mysterious tunnels, chase down
alleys, and fly as if by magic, but there’s hardly a single opportunity
to actually do any of these things.

I know of two exceptions. In Boston, there is a company called [5
Wits](http://www.5-wits.com/). The experience is something like this:
you enter an unassuming rug shop and when the salesman asks if he can
help you, you tell him the secret pass code. He gets a funny look on his
face, locks the door and pulls down the blinds. He pulls back the rug to
reveal a television screen that briefs you on your secret mission.

Once briefed, he shows you a concealed door where you tiptoe down to an
underground passage way, only to find [one of those arrays of
laser-triggers](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/e/eb/Entrapment_Gin_posterior.jpg),
where you have to crawl underneath the lasers without setting them off.
This leads to a whole underground lair, where you have to solve various
puzzles to find the stolen plans, erase evidence of your intrusion, and
disarm a bomb. It’s enormous fun.

It’s hard not to think this will be the future of in-person
entertainment in the era of the Internet. Sure, movie companies are
loading up on gimmicks like 3D to force people into theaters, but it’s
hard to see that working in the long-term. No, we should embrace the
trend — let the Internet distribute every movie ever made and free up
these physical spaces to provide the kind of experience that you can
only provide in an actual physical space.

I feel (have always felt) the same way about museums. Go to a local
museum and look around — how much do you see that actually couldn’t be
provided by a website or a book? That’s why I was so excited to visit
[the City Museum](http://www.citymuseum.org/) in St. Louis.

In the dark days of St. Louis, when everyone with money had fled to the
suburbs, an artist named Bob Cassilly bought a large abandoned shoe
factory downtown. He and his friends begun using scraps and bargains to
turn the place into a giant sculpture park. As you walk in, you enter
the mouth of a giant whale, inside there are dozens of passage ways to
crawl through and climb on, each filled with its own surprises and
sculptures. Crawl down and you’re led through a network of caves which
spiral upward and upward until you find yourself atop a giant
eight-story slide. As you slide down, picking up speed, you literally
ride through a giant classical organ, playing music so loud it shakes
you to your bones. And that’s just the beginning.

The City Museum has been so successful, its led a renaissance of
downtown St. Louis. Part of the building has been turned into offices
and trendy lofts and the neighborhood now has some trendy restaurants
and a shuttle. I flew to St. Louis just to visit it and I don’t regret
it one bit.

But I am mystified by why there aren’t more places like these. There’s
definitely a universe where I work on building more. Instead we get
bland amusement parks, pretentious performances like Punchdrunk, and
dull museums and galleries. New York City worked itself into a tizzy
when artist Carsten Holler exhibited a slide a quarter of the size of
the one at the City Museum. Surely a city of that size can support a
place like this of its own. What am I missing?


How Python 3 Should Have Worked
===============================

March 9, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/python3)

* * * * *

As a workaday Python developer, it’s hard to shake the feeling that the
Python 2 to 3 transition isn’t working. I get occasional requests to
make my libraries work in 3 but it’s far from clear how to and when I
try to look it up I find all sorts of conflicting advice, none of which
sounds very practical.

Indeed, when you see new 3.x versions rolling off the line and no one
using them, it’s hard to shake the feeling that Python might die in this
transition. How will we ever make it across the chasm?

It seems to me that in all the talk about Python 3000 being a new,
radical, blue-sky vision of the future, we neglected the proven methods
of getting there. In the Python 2 era, we had a clear method for adding
language changes:

1.  In Python 2.a, support for `from __future__ import new_feature` was
    added so you could use the new feature if you explicitly declared
    you wanted it.

2.  In Python 2.b, support was added by default so you could just use it
    without the future declaration.

3.  In Python 2.c, warnings begun being issued when you tried to use the
    old way, explaining you needed to change or your code would stop
    working.

4.  In Python 2.d, it actually did stop working.

It seems to me this process worked pretty well. And I don’t see why it
couldn’t work for the Python 3 transition. This would mean mainly just:

1.  A Python 2.x release that added support for
    `from __future__ import python3`.

Putting this at the top of a file would declare it to be a Python3 file
and allow the interpreter to parse it accordingly. (I realize behind the
scenes this would mean a lot of work to merge tr 2 and 3 interpreters,
but honestly it would always have been better to have a unified codebase
to maintain.)

Then if I wanted my Python 2 program to use some 3 modules, I just need
to make sure those modules have the import line at the top. If I want to
do a new release of my module that works on Python 3, I just need to
declare that it only works in Python 2.x and higher and release a
version that’s been run through 2to3 (with the new import statement). If
my project is big, I can even port files to 3 one at a time, leaving the
rest as 2 until someone gets around to fixing the rest. Most
importantly, I can start porting to Puhon 3 without waiting for all my
dependencies to do the same, parallelizing what until now has been a
rather serial process.

Users know they can safely upgrade to 2.x since it won’t break any
existing code. Developers know everyone will eventually upgrade to 2.x
so they can drop support for earlier versions. But since 2.x supports
code that also runs in 3, they can start writing and releasing code
that’s future-compatible as well. Eventually the vast major code will
work in 3 and users can upgrade to 3. (2.x will issue warnings to the
remaining stragglers.) Finally, we can drop support for 2.x and all live
happily having crossed the bridge together.

This isn’t a radical idea. It’s how Python upgrades have always worked.
And unless we use it again, I don’t see how we’re ever going to cross
this chasm.


y the power of exponents, just five levels of councils, each consisting of only fifty people, is enough to cover over three hundred million people.?
====================================================================================================================================================

April 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/parpolity)

* * * * *

The government of a republic, James Madison wrote in Federalist No.39
(Conformity of the Plan to Republican Principles, 1788), must ?be
derived from the great body of the society, not from an inconsiderable
proportion, or a favored class of it; otherwise a handful of tyrannical
nobles, exercising their oppressions by a delegation of their powers,
might aspire to the rank of republicans, and claim for their government
the honorable title of republic.?

Looking at our government today?a House of professional politicians, a
Senate filled with multimillionaires, a string of presidential family
dynasties?it seems hard to maintain that our officials are in fact
?derived from the great body of the society? and not ?a favored class?
merely posing as representatives of the people.

Unless politics is a tradition in your family, your odds of getting
elected to federal office are slim. And unless you?re a white male
lawyer, you rarely get to vote for someone like yourself in a national
race. Nor, in reality, do we have an opportunity to choose policy
positions: no major candidates support important proposals that most
voters agree with, like single-payer health care.

Instead, national elections have been boiled down to simple binary
choices, which advertising men and public relations teams reduce to pure
emotions: Fear. (A bear prowls through the woods.) Hope. (The sun rises
over a hill.) Vote Smith. Or maybe Jones.

Nor does the major media elevate the level of debate. Instead of
substantive discussions about policy proposals and their effects, they
spend their time on horse-race coverage (who?s raised the most money?
who?s polling well in Ohio?) and petty scandals (how much did that
haircut cost? was someone somewhere offended by that remark?)

The result after all this dumbing down? In 2004, voters who said they
chose a presidential candidate based on the candidate?s agendas, ideas,
platforms, or goals comprised a whopping 10% of the electorate. So it?s
not too surprising when political scientists find that voters? decisions
can be explained by such random factors as whether they like red or
blue, whether the economy is good or bad, or whether the current party
has been in office for long or not.

Aside from the occasional telephone poll, the opinions of ?the great
body of the society? have been edited out of the picture. Way back in
Federalist No. 10 (The Utility of the Union as a Safeguard Against
Domestic Faction and Insurrection (continued), 1787), Madison put his
finger on the reason. ?However small the republic may be,? he noted,
?the representatives must be raised to a certain number, in order to
guard against the cabals of a few.? But similarly, ?however large it may
be, they must be limited to a certain number, in order to guard against
the confusion of a multitude.?

The result is that the population grows while the number of
representatives stays fixed, leaving each politician to represent more
and more people. The first Congress had a House of 65 members
representing 40,000 voters and three million citizens (they had a
whopping 1.3% voter turnout back then). That?s a representative for
around every 600 voters or 46,000 citizens (the size of the average
baseball stadium). A baseball stadium may be a bit of an unruly mob, but
it?s not unimaginably large.

Today, by contrast, we have 435 representatives and 300 million
citizens?one for roughly every 700,000 citizens. There isn?t a stadium
in the world big enough to hold that many people. It?s a number more
akin to a television audience (it?s about how many people tune in to
watch Keith Olbermann each night).

Which is exactly what the modern constituency has become: the TV
audience following along at home. Even if you wanted to, you can?t have
a real conversation with a TV audience. It is too big to convey a sense
of what each individual is thinking. Instead of a group to represent,
it?s a mob to be managed.

* * * * *

I agree with Madison that there is roughly a right size for a group of
representatives ?on both sides of which inconveniences will be found to
lie. By enlarging too much the number of electors, you render the
representatives too little acquainted with all their local circumstances
and lesser interests; as by reducing it too much, you render him unduly
attached to these, and too little fit to comprehend and pursue great and
national objects.?

But what Madison missed is that there is no similar limit on the number
of such groups. To take a technological analogy, the Internet is, at
bottom, an enormous collection of wires. Yet nobody would ever think of
it this way. Instead, we group the wires into chips and the chips into
computers and the computers into networks and the networks into the
Internet. And people only deal with things at each level: when the
computer breaks, we can?t identify which wire failed; we take the whole
thing into the shop.

One of the most compelling visions for rebooting democracy adopts this
system of abstraction for politics. Parpolity, developed by the
political scientist Stephen Shalom, would build a legislature out of a
hierarchical series of nested councils. Agreeing with Madison, he says
each council should be small enough that everyone can engage in
face-to-face discussion but large enough that there is a diversity of
opinion and the number of councils is minimized. He estimates the right
size is 25 to 50 people.

So, to begin with, let us imagine a council of you and your 40 closest
neighbors?perhaps the other people in your apartment building or on your
block. You get together every so often to discuss the issues that
concern you and your neighborhood. And you may vote to set policy for
the area which the council covers.

But your council has another function: it selects one of its own to send
as a representative to the next council up. There the process repeats
itself: the representative from your block and its 40 closest neighbors
meet every so often to discuss the political issues that concern the
area. And, of course, your representative reports back to the group,
gets your recommendations on difficult questions, and takes suggestions
for issues to raise at the next area council meeting.

By the power of exponents, just five levels of councils, each consisting
of only fifty people, is enough to cover over three hundred million
people. But?and this is the truly clever bit?at the area council the
whole process repeats itself. Just as each block council nominates a
representative to the area council, each area council nominates a
representative to the city council, and each city council to the state
council, each state council to the national council, and so on.

Shalom discusses a number of further details?provisions for voting,
recalls, and delegation?but it?s the idea of nesting that?s key. Under
such a system, there are only four representatives who stand between you
and the people setting national policy, each of whom is forced to
account to their constituents in regular, small face-to-face meetings.
Politicians in such a system could not be elected through empty appeals
to mass emotions. Instead, they would have to sit down, face-to-face,
with a council of their peers and persuade them that they are best
suited to represent their interests and positions.

* * * * *

There is something rather old-fashioned about this notion of sitting
down with one?s fellow citizens and rationally discussing the issues of
the day. But there is also something exciting and new about it. In the
same way that blogs have given everyone a chance to be a publisher,
Wikipedia lets everyone be an encyclopedia author, and YouTube lets
anyone be a television producer, Parpolity would let everyone be a
politician.

The Internet has shown us that the pool of people with talent far
outnumbers the few with the background, connections, and wealth to get
to a place in society where they can practice their talents
professionally. (It also shows us that many people with those
connections aren?t particularly talented.)

The democratic power of the Net means you don?t need connections to
succeed. In a world where kids can be television stars just by finding a
video camera and an Internet connection, citizens may begin to wonder
why getting into politics is so much harder.

For many years, politicians had a ready excuse: politics was a difficult
job, which required carefully weighing and evaluating evidence and
making difficult decisions. Only a select few could be trusted to
perform it; the vast majority of the population was woefully
underqualified.

And perhaps in the era of a cozy relationship between politicians and
the press, this illusion could be sustained. But as netroots activists
and blogs push our national conversation ever closer to the real world,
this excuse is becoming laughable. After all, these men and women of
supposedly sober judgment voted overwhelmingly for disasters like the
Iraq War. ?No one could have ever predicted this,? TV?s talking heads
all insist. No one, that is, except the great body of society, whose
insistence that Iraq did not pose a threat and that an occupation would
be long and brutal went ignored.

New online tools for interaction and collaboration have let people come
together across space and time to build amazing things. As the Internet
breaks down the last justifications for a professional class of
politicians, it also builds up the tools for replacing them. For the
most part, their efforts have so far been focused on education and
entertainment, but it?s only a matter of time before they turn to
politics. And when they do, professional politicians beware!


The 2011 Review of Books
========================

April 19, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2011)

* * * * *

*Previously:* [2010](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2010),
[2009](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2009),
[2008](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/2008books),
[2007](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2007),
[2006](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2006)

2011 was a stressful year, in many ways, and so for large parts of it I
did not really read. [Instead, I
tracked](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0As8ovKAdyK-hdGJEd3h3eWpjaWhHRndFS3loOW1sTmc&hl=en_US#gid=0)
how many books I started and how many pages I got through each, for a
total of 112 books started, 70 finished, and over 20,000 pages read. Not
up to my usual standards. Nonetheless…

**Key:** Books in bold are those that were so great my heart leaps at
the chance to tell you about them even now. If you only have time to
read some of this, read those.

1.  *[The Net Delusion](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586488740)* by
    Evgeny Morozov

    Surprisingly well-written and well-researched.

2.  *Managing Oneself* by Peter Drucker

3.  ***[The Halo Effect](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743291263)* by
    Phil Rosenzweig**

    [Last year](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2010), I recommended
    *Good to Great*, calling it “actual science”. [Dave Bridgeland
    quickly corrected me](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2010#c8)
    and recommended this book, which is vastly better. Not only does it
    systematically debunk the pretensions to science in *Good to Great*
    and the other management bestsellers in an absolutely delightful
    manner, it provides a short but very thought-provoking discussion of
    strategy in its own right.

    You can mock the banality of its recommendations, but there’s no
    question: this book is well worth it just for the way it encourages
    habits of genuine scientific thought. I knew I never should have
    fallen so low as to trust a business book!

4.  *[The Farnsworth Invention](http://books.theinfo.org/go/057366286X)*
    by Aaron Sorkin

    Clearly not Sorkin’s best, but short and fun. Also interesting to
    see how Sorkin plays with the fourth wall in a play format.

5.  ***[The Trial](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805209999)* by Franz
    Kafka (translated by Breon Mitchell)**

    A deep and magnificent work. I’d not really read much Kafka before
    and had grown up led to believe that it was a paranoid and
    hyperbolic work, dystopian fiction in the style of George Orwell.
    Yet I read it and found it was precisely accurate — every single
    detail perfectly mirrored my own experience. This isn’t fiction, but
    documentary.

    *Spoilers follow.*

    The bulk of the book is about K trying to find someone to fight his
    case for him, and failing miserably. As an individual in a world of
    bureaucracies, he concludes [there’s no
    substitute](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/delegation) but to do the
    work himself.

    This is set against the backdrop of his “day job” at the bank —
    about as characteristic a bureaucracy as you can imagine. The bank,
    by contrast, has no difficulty finding people to do its work for it.
    Even when K slacks off or gets distracted, the bank continues
    chugging along just fine — as seen in the vice president who leaps
    to take K’s work from him. (Compare: The independent lawyer is under
    no such pressure to actually get K’s work done.)

    A vivid illustration that bureaucracies, once they get started,
    continue doing whatever mindless thing they’ve been set up to do,
    regardless of whether the people in them particularly want to do it
    or whether it’s even a good idea. At the same time, individual
    people have an incredibly hard time executing long-term or
    large-scale tasks on their own, even when they’re quite motivated.

    But what of the priest? The priest tells K a story about how as an
    individual in a bureaucracy, it’s a losing game to try to ask
    permission. You have to persuade your boss, your boss’s boss, and
    your boss’s boss’s boss (so terribly powerful that your boss can’t
    even bear to look at him). If you wait for your request to be
    approved by the chain of command, it won’t happen at all.

    K argues with the priest about how horribly unfair this is: isn’t
    your boss (the individual) doing the wrong thing somehow? The priest
    maintains there are many different theories about this question of
    individual responsibility. But K is missing the larger point: this
    is just how bureaucracy works.

    K takes the lesson to heart and decides to stop fighting the system
    and just live his life without asking for permission. It goes
    well…for a while. But it still seems a better option than the
    alternatives.

6.  *The Great Stagnation* by Tyler Cowen

    A dreadful little book, which boils down to nothing more than a vast
    tract of economic illiteracy. Take just the insanity that is chapter
    2. Cowen takes as his dictum:

    > The larger the role of government in the economy, the more the
    > published figures for GDP growth are overstating improvements in
    > our living standard.

    For example, as government-insured health care takes up a larger
    proportion of our country’s spending, we can’t accurately measure
    how our living standards are improving since it’s paid for at set
    rates by government instead of through a competitive market process
    to set accurate prices.

    But, as any economist should realize, our standard of living is
    *never* appropriately measured through prices, because of consumer
    surplus. The *whole point* of a competitive economy is to create
    this disconnect. Let’s say a chair greatly improves my standard of
    living and I would pay \$10,000 for one. In a competitive market,
    different chair providers compete for my money by offering a lower
    price, eventually driving the price of the chair down to the cost of
    production.

    Has my ‘living standard’ [*sic*] thereby decreased? Of course not!
    In fact, it has increased since I can buy several chairs (while
    still getting thousands of dollars in consumer surplus!). It’s
    insane to blame this on government.

    Cowen’s other arguments are similarly ignorant. For example, he
    tries to claim that the reason we’re in a recession, “not filling
    government coffers or supporting many families”, is because “our
    major innovations are sprining up in sectors where a lot of work is
    done by machines, not by human beings. … That is one reason why we
    have been seeing a ‘jobless recovery.’” (L503)

    Nonsense on stilts. [The Federal Reserve
    decides](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whynojobs) how many people
    will have jobs, iPads have nothing to do with it.

    This book’s popularity is a sad sign of how ignorance triumphs when
    it benefits the powerful.

7.  *[Lifted](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B004K1F9KG)* by Evan Ratliff
    ([iOS](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/the-atavist/id408059276?mt=8&ls=1))

    A fast, fun real-life heist story.

8.  *[Getting Things Done](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0142000280)* by
    David Allen [reread]

    Still good, though not worth starting a cult over. Its insights are
    more psychological than anything else.

9.  *[Private Firms Working in the Public
    Interest](http://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD212.html)*
    by Abigail Bugbee Brown

    Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, Olympus — why is there so much accounting
    fraud? Why isn’t this stuff caught? In this serious but
    briskly-written work, Abigail Brown explains the incredible story of
    how accounting firms actually work. Paid by the people they’re
    supposed to be auditing, accounting firms have developed an
    elaborate culture of corruption, letting them aid and abet the most
    egregious forms of dishonesty.

    (Disclosure: Ms. Brown and I were lab fellows together at the
    Harvard Center for Ethics.)

10. *QED* by Peter Parnell

    Not bad, by any stretch, but on the page, for anyone who’s familiar
    with Feynman’s actual writings, this can’t help but feel thin.

11. *Although Of Course You End Up Becoming Yourself* with David Foster
    Wallace

    After a great artist dies, there comes a point where the barrel of
    work that can be published posthumously seems like it’s running dry
    (Elliot Smith’s *New Moon*, Kafka’s *Office Papers*). Publishing the
    transcript of a rambling conversation with DFW as a book would seem
    to be similarly stretching.

    But, like the others, it turns out to be appreciated all the same.
    DFW is delightful and witty and it’s fascinating to see how much of
    his linguistic creativity and charm wasn’t the result of any special
    effort but simply his natural form to speech. He must have been such
    a delight to spend time with.

    The problem is that the editor of this volume, David Lipsky, is
    apparently a dreadful writer who is deluded into thinking he’s a
    great one. Taking DFW’s polite words of support as deep praise, he
    is not shy about sharing his ‘gifts’ via overwrought introductions
    and interpolations. The result is an infuriating combination of
    glorious rants from DFW cut with ignorant and ill-written
    speculation by someone desperate to show off. (Though I don’t recall
    Lipsky’s recent piece about DFW being so bad, so maybe he merely
    needed an editor…or was told to pad the book out with random
    asides.)

12. *Inside WikiLeaks* by Daniel Domscheit-Berg

13. *[Brainiac](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0812974999)* by Ken Jennings

    Who knew Ken Jennings was so funny? A witty and delightful book,
    though obviously not one that’s anything more than trivial.

14. *[From Dictatorship to
    Democracy](http://www.aeinstein.org/organizations98ce.html)* by Gene
    Sharp

    A short but impressive guide to how to run a democratic revolution.
    Reportedly rather influential and certainly provides an interesting
    structure for thought.

15. *[Kingpin: How One Hacker Took Over the Billion-Dollar Cybercrime
    Underground](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0307588696)* by Kevin
    Poulsen

    A fun and intriguing book. Poulsen writes in a restrained style, but
    the pace is fast and the images are vivid and the technology seems
    pretty right-on.

    (Disclosure: Kevin Poulsen and I worked together at Wired.)

16. *[Diary of a Very Bad Year: Confessions of an Anonymous Hedge Fund
    Manager](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B0051BNV4U)* by Anonymous Hedge
    Fund Manager and Keith Gessen (with n+1)

    An annotated transcript of a series of interviews between the
    brilliant literary writer Keith Gessen and a sympathetic and
    polymathic hedge fund manager. The hedge fund manager tries to
    provide some insight into what his world is like, in real time as
    it’s collapsing, but Gessen’s questioning typically isn’t detailed
    enough to get a very vivid picture. HFM’s stories were thrilling as
    things happened but with distance they seem somewhat blurred; it’s
    harder to fit them in now that we think we understand what happened.
    They’re both delightful characters, though, enough to still make the
    book a decent read.

17. *[The Watchman: The Twisted Life and Crimes of Serial Hacker Kevin
    Poulsen](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316528579)* by Jonathan
    Littman

    Whatever ese you want to say about Kevin Poulsen, he was certainly
    funny. Littman provides a vivid retelling of his strange story. I’m
    told Poulsen denies most of what’s in this book, so it may not have
    much value as documentary, but as entertainment it’s pretty good.

18. *Tourist Season* by Carl Hiassen

19. *Strip Tease* by Carl Hiassen
20. *Skinny Dip* by Carl Hiassen

    Carl Hiassen writes murder mysteries with a political bent. They’re
    fun airport reading but it’s hard to justify them as much more than
    that.

21. *[Scoop](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316926108)* by Evelyn Waugh

    This book, the source of the name *The Daily Beast*, is a vicious
    satire of journalism. It has some quite witty and biting moments,
    including some I’ve found myself referring back to, but I’m not sure
    it holds together as literature.

22. *The Age of WikiLeaks* by Greg Mitchell

    An good, well-written summary of the story so far, but nothing more
    than that.

23. *JSTOR: A History* by Roger C. Schonfeld

24. *Team Rodent* by Carl Hiassen

    A very short book packed full of muck about the Disney Corporation.
    Fun stuff, but it comes off as very light — basically just a list of
    stories Hiassen seems to have picked up in his years of living
    nearby.

25. *Shots* by David Fenton

26. *At a Slight Angle to the Universe* by William Bowen
27. *[The Honor Code](http://books.theinfo.org/go/039334052X)* by K.
    Anthony Appiah

    A collection of interesting stories about how social revolutions
    have happened. Appiah tries to tie them together with a story about
    honor, but I think that’s ultimately less interesting and persuasive
    than just reading the stories themselves.

28. *The Case of the Speluncean Explorers: Nine New Stories* by Peter
    Suber

29. *The Story of Colors* by Subcomandante Marcos

    Absurdly, a children’s book by Subcomandante Marcos. As weird as
    you’d expect, but not as good as you’d hope.

30. *[The New-York Historical Society: Lessons from One Nonprofit’s Long
    Struggle for Survival](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0787901873)* by
    Kevin Guthrie

    A compellingly-written and fascinatingly-told story of how the
    New-York Historical Society, a grand old museum housing countless
    invaluable treasures, was so consistently financially mismanaged
    that despite its greatness it found itself constantly on the verge
    of financial ruin. Clearly written as a cautionary tale for those
    who would run a non-profit.

31. *[The Pale King](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316074233)* by David
    Foster Wallace

    In his notes, David Foster Wallace described this unfinished book
    about boredom as one where “something big threatens to happen but
    doesn’t actually happen”. As a result, it’s probably less unfinished
    than it feels. It has the usual DFW virtuosity with language
    (including some truly poetic sections) and a tax-related premise
    that somehow captures the entirety of this political moment the same
    way *Infinite Jest* captured the cultural one, but there’s certainly
    nothing in the way of a plot the way there was in *Infinite Jest*.

32. *[Bossypants](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0316056863)* by Tina Fey

    This book is like a literary cupcake: a small bombshell of sugar
    without very much in the way of substance. I believe I read the
    whole thing while sitting in an airport terminal and while I enjoyed
    it and laughed, it’s hard to claim I took anything away from the
    experience.

33. ***[Poor Economics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586487981)* by
    Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo**

    God, what a book! *Poor Economics* is a series of tales of
    foreigners trying to save the far-flung poor, while failing to
    realize not only that their developed-country ideas are terrible
    disasters in practice, but also that everything they’ve learned to
    think of as solid — even something as simple as measuring distance —
    is far more fraught, and complex, and political than they ever could
    have imagined. It’s a stunning feeling to have the basic building
    blocks of your world questioned and crumbled before you — and a
    powerful lesson in the value of self-skepticism for everyone who’s
    trying to do something.

34. *The Filter Bubble* by Eli Pariser

35. *[The Psychopath Test](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1594485755)* by
    Jon Ronson

    Another fun puff pastry of a book.

36. *[Empire State](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B0078XPQPG)* by Jason
    Shiga

    Reads a bit like Shiga trying to do his own version of
    *[Shortcomings](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1897299753)*. Not a bad
    book, by any means, but it has none of the Jason Shiga magic.

37. ***[Bookhunter](http://books.theinfo.org/go/097427156X)* by Jason
    Shiga**

    Words won’t do it justice: an action-movie-thriller of a book, a
    hilarious adrenaline-fueled ride that’s impossible to put down. I’ve
    never had this much fun with a piece of entertainment. Just sheer
    delight.

38. *[Meanwhile](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0810984237)* by Jason Shiga

    Not his best, but still entrancing and strange and very, very good.

39. *[He’s Just Not That Into You: The No-Excuses Truth to Understanding
    Guys](http://books.theinfo.org/go/141690977X)* by Greg Behrendt and
    Liz Tuccillo

40. *[Mac OS X 10.7 Lion: the Ars Technica
    review](http://arstechnica.com/apple/reviews/2011/07/mac-os-x-10-7.ars)*
    by John Siracusa
41. ***[Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality](http://hpmor.com/)*
    by Eliezer Yudkowsky**

    This is a book whose title still makes me laugh and yet it may just
    turn out to be one of the greatest books ever written. The writing
    is shockingly good, the plotting is some of the best in all of
    literature, and the stories are simply pure genius. I fear this book
    may never get the accolades it deserves, because it’s too hard to
    look past the silly name and publishing model, but I hope you, dear
    reader, are wiser than that! A must-read.

    As it says at the beginning, you really need to give it a couple
    chapters to get started before passing judgment — the first bunch
    are quite silly and it doesn’t seem worth sticking with until you’ve
    gotten past them.

42. *[In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our
    Lives](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1416596585)* by Steven Levy

    Levy again does what he does so well: make an alien culture visible
    and comprehensible. A great guide to Google.

    (Disclosure: Levy once included me in an essay collection he
    edited.)

43. *[How to Count](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005DPIKPE)* by Steven
    Frank

    The first volume into what will surely be a wonderful introduction
    to programming. Certainly the best book on counting that I’ve read.

44. ***[The Inner Game of
    Tennis](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679778314)* by Timothy
    Gallwey**

    This book touched me deeply and made me rethink the entire way I
    approached life; it’s about vastly more than just tennis. I can’t
    really describe it, but I can recommend [this video with Alan Kay
    and the author](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=50L44hEtVos) that
    will blow your mind.

45. ***[The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of The Learning
    Organization](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0385517254)* by Peter M.
    Senge**

    This book does not live up to its title — it has very little
    practical advice on how to create a learning organization — but
    still, it’s an important topic and I don’t know of anything better.
    It’s full of fascinating stories and provocations that will change
    how you think about business.

46. *[House of Holes](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B007MXCUNS)* by
    Nicholson Baker

    I’m not normally one for filthy books, but Baker’s writing is so
    good that he somehow manages to make this one just utterly
    compelling despite the smut. I started reading and I couldn’t stop,
    he just draws you into his world of pure insanity.

47. ***[Rick Perry and his
    Eggheads](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005HE8ED4)* by Sasha
    Issenberg**

    Sasha Issenberg is a miracle-worker. This book (really an excerpt
    from his forthcoming book) is so very, very good that it just blows
    me away. Issenberg tells the tale of everything I’ve been trying to
    say to everyone in politics, but he does it in a real-life three-act
    morality play that’s so good it could be a model on how to tell a
    story.

48. *[Haiti: After the Quake](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586489739)*
    by Paul Farmer

    Farmer’s gripping personal story of returning to Haiti after the
    earthquake and seeing the devastation it had left, both physically
    and politically. It’s a personal narrative, not a work of
    investigative journalism, but it still provides powerful insight
    into what happened.

49. *[Confessions of a “Rape Cop”
    Juror](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005LQV3CM)* by Patrick Kirkland

    When I first heard that the “rape cop” had been acquitted, I took it
    as yet another instance of a “rape culture” in which crimes against
    women go unpunished. This book persuaded me that we were all wrong.
    It’s a fascinating real-life story of what it’s like inside a jury
    room and what it really means to have proof beyond a reasonable
    doubt.

50. ***[The End of Loser
    Liberalism](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0615533639)* by Dean Baker**

    Dean Baker knocks it out of the park again — a must-read for anyone
    who cares about economic policy.

51. ***[The Lean Startup](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0307887898)* by
    Eric Ries**

    Ries presents a translation of the Toyota Production System to
    startups — and it’s so clearly the right way to run a startup that
    it’s hard to imagine how we got along before it. Unfortunately, the
    book has become so trendy that I find many people claiming to swear
    allegiance to it who clearly missed the point entirely. Read it with
    an open mind and let it challenge you, so you can start to
    understand how transformative it really is.

52. *The Astonishing Secret of Awesome Man* by Michael Chabon,
    illustrated by Jake Parker

    A short children’s book with absolutely gorgeous illustrations by
    Parker and a cute little story by Chabon.

53. *[Harry Potter and the Sorceror’s Stone (Book
    1)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/059035342X)* by J. K. Rowling

54. *[Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (Book
    2)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0439064872)* by J. K. Rowling
55. *[Republic, Lost](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0446576433)* by
    Lawrence Lessig
56. *[Flat Earth News](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0099512688)* by Nick
    Davies

    I’ve read a lot of books of media criticism and they all tend to
    trod similar ground: sensationalism, political bias, etc., etc. Nick
    Davies has written what is, in many ways, the same book — except he
    write it as an insider, not an outsider. As a result, he explains
    *how* the media gets to be this way, *why* it is as bad as it is —
    and he tells lots of delicious insider stories of incredible things
    he discovered that got cut or buried or distorted beyond all
    recognition. Davies is now famous for bringing down the Murdoch
    empire, but if more people read this book, perhaps he will bring
    down the rest of corrupt journalism as well.

57. *[Steve Jobs](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1451648537)* by Walter
    Isaacson

    [Siracusa is right](http://5by5.tv/hypercritical/42): they got the
    wrong guy. The book is compelling and readable, there’s no doubt
    about that, but it tells a story that’s basically already been told.
    Isaacson is so clueless and uncurious that pretty much all of his
    “exclusive interviews” were wasted; there’s no insight in any of
    this, just weird lapses into authorial judgment.

    Robert Caro has said there’s one more biography he wants to write
    after he finishes LBJ. I dearly hope that it’s Steve Jobs.

58. *[Anything You Want](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1936719118)* by
    Derek Sivers

    I constantly find myself loving Derek Sivers’ blog posts, and while
    they feel eerily insubstantial collected together here, they’re
    still full of enough insight and good humor to make them well worth
    reading.

59. ***[CODE: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and
    Software](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0735611319)* by Charles
    Petzold**

    A magnificent achievement. Charles Petzold starts with the story of
    two kids across the street who wish to communicate with each other
    and, from this simple beginning, builds up an entire computer
    without ever making it seem like something that should be over your
    head. I never really felt I understood the computer until I read
    this book.

60. *[Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (Book
    3)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0439136369)* by J. K. Rowling

61. *[Masscult and Midcult: Essays Against the American
    Grain](http://books.theinfo.org/go/159017447X)* by Dwight Macdonald
    (edited by John Summers), with an introduction by Louis Menand

    Dwight Macdonald is one of those delightful cranks that you can’t
    help but love watching. Summers has collected a magnificent listing
    of things to watch — plus included an introduction that’s the
    incredible Menand at his best.

62. *[The Ghost [Writer]](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B000WJSA6A)* by
    Robert Harris

    It’s hard to shake the feeling that a big part of the appeal of this
    book is watching Tony Blair get arrested for war crimes, but that
    doesn’t change the fact that it’s a first-rate political thriler.

63. ***[What It Takes: The Way to the White
    House](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0679746498)* by Richard Ben
    Cramer**

    Were this just the story of how George H. W. Bush got elected, it’d
    be one of the few biographies that belonged in the same league as
    Robert Caro. But it’s so much more than that: Richard Ben Cramer
    gives the same treatment to dozens of candidates in the 1988
    presidential election: Gary Hart, Bob Dole, Joe Biden, Dick
    Gephardt, and on and on. Even if you didn’t care about politics,
    this book would be worth reading simply because the writing is so
    good. But if you do, there’s never been a better exposition of what
    drives these men who wish to be our leaders and what they have to go
    through to get there.

64. *[Joan: Forty Years of Life, Loss, and Friendship with Joan
    Didion](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005YF5RZO)* by Sara Davidson

    It’s hard to shake the feeling that this book is merely the author
    attempting to cash in on their minor friendship with Joan Didion,
    but I love Didion so much that I’m just grateful for the stories.

65. [*How a Book is Born: The Making of* The Art of
    Fielding](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005LEWYYU) by Keith Gessen

    Gessen is an incredible writer and here he has the gift of getting
    to observe, first-hand, a heartwarming tale. A good story and a
    great introduction to the modern book business.

66. *[I’m Feeling Lucky: The Confessions of Google Employee Number
    59](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0547737394)* by Douglas Edwards

    There were many, many times in this book that I couldn’t help but
    wonder: How did he get away with writing this? Google apparently
    approved of the project and had chaperones in all his interviews,
    but nonetheless the book is just full of revelations and shockers
    that it’s hard to imagine Google would ever want to see the light of
    day.

    There are a lot of books written about Google, but this has got to
    be one of the best. Edwards is uniquely suited to the task: his
    talents as a writer allow him to craft a compelling read, his
    insider’s view of the very early days give him a detailed knowledge
    from which to tell his story, but his total lack of cultural
    chemistry with the rest of the Googlers allows him to find
    mysterious all the crazy things which they all take for granted. A
    fantastic read.

67. *[The Missionary Position: Mother Teresa in Theory and
    Practice](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1455523003)* by Christopher
    Hitchens

    Mother Teresa is a byword for saintliness, but have you ever stopped
    to ask why? Christopher Hitchens makes a convincing case that she’s
    something closer to a monster. Everyone I’ve told about this book is
    shocked by the concept, but it’s a short book with a pretty
    compelling argument.

68. *The Gated City* by Ryan Avent

69. *[Books I Did Not Read This Year: An
    Ebook](http://kieranhealy.org/blog/archives/2011/12/08/books-i-did-not-read-this-year-an-ebook/)*
    by Kieran Healy

    Healy is hilarious; this collection of blog posts was a delight.

70. *[The Devil and Sherlock
    Holmes](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0307275906)* by David Grann

    Grann is a masterful nonfiction writer; this is a collection of his
    pieces.




Perfect Institutions
====================

June 8, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectinstitutions)

* * * * *

In pretty much every major city in this country, there’s a Hollister Co.
clothing store — there are over 500 of them in all. Walk inside and it’s
like being transported: the windows are shuttered so they control the
light, the entrance has an L-shaped route so that you don’t catch a hint
of the outside world, the floors and ceilings have been replaced with
new patterns, thumping music controls the sound, special scents are
pumped into the air to control what you smell. An attractive young
person greets you at the door. You’re in a different world.

And, to a first approximation, this new world is perfect. Sure, if you
search hard, maybe you can find a ruffled edge on a shirt somewhere, but
it’s hardly enough to spoil the illusion. And this is what strikes me:
that in every major city, in this deeply-flawed country, you can find a
little bit of perfection.

No one person, I am sure, can accomplish this kind of perfection. Think
about yourself being responsible for creating such a place. Surely
there’s some part of it you’re not capable of doing — do you know where
to find the perfect music and the perfect scent and someone to tile the
ceiling and someone to take a perfect photograph for the wall and on and
on? And even if you are that kind of heroic generalist, who can handle
all of that, could you maintain it without flagging, day after day,
without loosening your standards, without giving in to the exhaustion
that maintaining such a perfect appearance takes? OK, perhaps you have
more willpower than I — but unless you’re Amy Goodman, even you must
take ill sometimes, must have a family emergency to attend to, or
*something*! Nobody’s perfect, right?

And yet, here they are, five hundred stores of perfection. (You may
detest what they are perfect at, but that’s not my point. The point is
that they have a vision and make it stick.) How do they do it?

“It’s obvious,” you say. “They don’t just have one person — they have a
whole bunch. When one falls down on the job, or skips out sick, the
others pick up the slack.” But those others are imperfect too. It seems
far from preordained that a bunch of imperfection combines to create the
perfect — it seems just as plausible that combining imperfect people
causes the imperfections to multiply, that the whole is far less than
the sum of its parts (I’m sure we’ve all been in such situations).

The difference between these two fates — between people’s imperfections
canceling each other out versus amplifying each other — is institutions,
the social structures that guide people in their actions. Hollister
seems gifted with an amazing set of institutions. I don’t know the
details, but we can imagine them: Everyone must show up for their shift
an hour early. If you don’t show, a manager calls in a replacement. The
managers keep an eye on your performance and if you don’t do a good
enough job folding shirts, you’re reprimanded or replaced. Perhaps a
roving “brand protection squad” goes around ensuring local managers are
upholding the high national standards. And on and on. Every failsafe has
a failsafe.

If you’ve ever tried building an organization yourself, you know how
hard it is to get something like this right. And yet the world is filled
with organizations that seem to do it effortlessly. This is the paradox
[at the heart of Kafka’s *The
Trial*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2011) and it’s one that
continues to astonish me. How do they do it? And how come no one else is
curious about the details of their success?


America After Meritocracy: Chris Hayes’ *The Twilight of The Elites*
====================================================================

June 20, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/meritocracy)

* * * * *

[[crossposted from Crooked
Timber](http://crookedtimber.org/2012/06/18/guest-review-by-aaron-swartz-chris-hayes-the-twilight-of-the-elites/)]

In his new book, *The Twilight of the Elites: America After
Meritocracy*, Chris Hayes manages the impossible trifecta: the book is
compellingly readable, impossibly erudite, and — most stunningly of all
— correct. At the end, I was left with just two quibbles: first, the
book’s chapter on “pop epistemology” thoroughly explicated how elites
got stuff wrong without bothering to mention the non-elites who got
things right, leaving the reader with the all-too-common impression that
getting it right was impossible; and second, the book never assembled
its (surprisingly sophisticated) argument into a single summary. To
discuss it, I feel we have to start with remedying the latter flaw:

Our nation’s institutions have crumbled, Hayes argues. From 2000–2010
(the “Fail Decade”), every major societal institution failed. Big
businesses collapsed with Enron and Worldcom, their auditors failed to
catch it, the Supreme Court got partisan in *Bush v. Gore*, our
intelligence apparatus failed to catch 9/11, the media lied us into
wars, the military failed to win them, professional sports was all on
steroids, the church engaged in and covered up sex abuse, the government
compounded disaster upon disaster in Katrina, and the banks crashed our
economy. How did it all go so wrong?

Hayes pins the blame on an unlikely suspect: meritocracy. We thought we
would just simply pick out the best and raise them to the top, but once
they got there they inevitably used their privilege to entrench
themselves and their kids (inequality is, Hayes says, “autocatalytic”).
Opening up the elite to more efficient competition didn’t make things
more fair, it just legitimated a more intense scramble. The result was
an arms race among the elite, pushing all of them to embrace the most
unscrupulous forms of cheating and fraud to secure their coveted
positions. As competition takes over at the high end, personal worth
resolves into exchange value, and the elite power accumulated in one
sector can be traded for elite power in another: a regulator can become
a bank VP, a modern TV host can use their stardom to become a
bestselling author (try to imagine Edward R. Murrow using the nightly
news to flog his books the way Bill O’Reilly does). This creates a
unitary elite, detached from the bulk of society, yet at the same time
even more insecure. You can never reach the pinnacle of the elite in
this new world; even if you have the most successful TV show, are you
also making blockbuster movies? bestselling books? winning Nobel Prizes?
When your peers are the elite at large, you can never clearly best them.

The result is that our elites are trapped in a bubble, where the usual
pointers toward accuracy (unanimity, proximity, good faith) only lead
them astray. And their distance from the way the rest of the country
really lives makes it impossible for them to do their jobs justly — they
just don’t get the necessary feedback. The only cure is to reduce
economic inequality, a view that has surprisingly support among the
population (clear majorities want to close the deficit by raising taxes
on the rich, which is more than can be said for any other plan). And
while Hayes is not a fan of heightening the contradictions, it is
possible that the next crisis will bring with it the opportunity to win
this change.

This is just a skeletal summary — the book itself is filled with
luscious texture to demonstrate each point and more in-depth discussion
of the mechanics of each mechanism (I would call it Elster meets
Gladwell if I thought that would be taken as praise). [So buy the book
already.](http://www.chrishayes.org/about/bio/) Now, as I said, I think
Hayes is broadly correct in his analysis. And I think his proposed
solution is spot on as well — when we were fellows together at the
Harvard Center for Ethics, I think we annoyed everyone else with our
repeated insistence that reducing economic inequality was somehow always
the appropriate solution to each of the many social ills the group
identified.

But when talking to other elites about this proposal, I notice a
confusion that’s worth clarifying, about the *structural* results of
inequality, rather than the merely quantitative ones. Class hangs over
the book like a haunting spectre (there’s a brief comment on p. 148 that
“Mills [had] a more nuanced theory of elite power than Marx’s concept of
a ruling class”) but I think it’s hard to see how the solution relates
to the problem without it. After all, we started by claiming the problem
is meritocracy, but somehow the solution is taxing the rich?

The clue comes in thinking clearly about the alternative to meritocracy.
It’s not picking surgeons by lottery, Hayes clarifies, but then what is
it? It’s about ameliorating power relationships altogether. Meritocracy
says “there must be one who rules, so let it be the best”;
egalitarianism responds “why must there?” It’s the power imbalance,
rather than inequality itself, that’s the problem.

Imagine a sci-fi world in which productivity has reached such impressive
heights that everyone can have every good they desire just from the work
young kids do for fun. By twiddling the knobs on their local MakerBot,
the kids produce enough food, clothing, and iPhones to satisfy everyone.
So instead of working, most people spend their days doing yoga or
fishing. But scarcity hasn’t completely faded away — there’s still
competition for the best spots at the fishing hole. So we continue to
let those be allocated by the market: the fishing hole spot is charged
for and the people who really want it earn the money to pay for it by
helping people with various chores.

In this sort of world, inequality doesn’t seem like much of a problem.
Sure, some people get the best fishing hole spots, but that’s because
they did the most chores. If you want the spot more than they do, you
can do more work. But the inequality doesn’t come with power — the guy
with the best fishing hole spot can’t [say “fuck me or you’re
fired”](http://crookedtimber.org/2012/06/11/lizardbreath-meet-charter-cities/).

This sci-fi world may sound ridiculous, but it’s basically the one
[Keynes
predicted](http://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/1930/our-grandchildren.htm)
we’d soon be living in:

> Now it is true that the needs of human beings may seem to be
> insatiable. But they fall into two classes – those needs which are
> absolute in the sense that we feel them whatever the situation of our
> fellow human beings may be, and those which are relative in the sense
> that we feel them only if their satisfaction lifts us above, makes us
> feel superior to, our fellows. Needs of the second class, those which
> satisfy the desire for superiority, may indeed be insatiable; for the
> higher the general level, the higher still are they. But this is not
> so true of the absolute needs – a point may soon be reached, much
> sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when these needs are
> satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further energies
> to non-economic purposes.
>
> […] But, of course, it will all happen gradually, not as a
> catastrophe. Indeed, it has already begun. The course of affairs will
> simply be that there will be ever larger and larger classes and groups
> of people from whom problems of economic necessity have been
> practically removed.

And that’s what a reduction in economic inequality could achieve. The
trend in recent decades (since the fall of the Soviet Union and the
ruling class’s relief that “There Is No Alternative”) has been for the
people at the top to seize all the economic gains, leaving everyone else
increasing insecure and dependent on their largesse. (Calling themselves
“job creators”, on this view, is not so much a brag as a threat.) But
with less inequality, it could be otherwise. Instead of a world in which
there are a handful of big networks with the money to run television
shows, everyone could afford to have [their Sunday morning
conversations](http://up.msnbc.com/) filmed and livestreamed. Instead of
only huge conglomerates having the capital and distribution to launch
new product lines, everyone could make and market their own line of
[underwear](http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2012/04/26/kickstarter-of-the-day-flint-and-tinder-edition/)
or [video
games](http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2012/06/12/kickstarter_where_celebrities_can_go_to_get_money_they_don_t_need.html)
([instead of just elite Red Sox
pitchers](http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2012/06/_38_studios_and_kingdoms_of_amalur_how_curt_schilling_s_video_game_company_duped_rhode_island_out_of_75_million_.html)).

Even on strict efficiency grounds, this strikes me as a more alluring
view than the usual meritocracy. Why put all your eggs in one basket,
even if it’s the best basket? Surely you’d get better results by giving
more baskets a try.

You can argue that this is exactly where technology is bringing us —
[popular kids on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQOFRZ1wNLw)
get made into huge pop sensations, right? — and the genius of Hayes’
book is to show us why this is not enough. The egaliatarian demand
shouldn’t be that we need more black pop stars or female pop stars or
YouTube sensation pop stars, but to question why we need elite
superstars at all. I hope Hayes’ next book shows us what the world
without them is like.


New: The Pokayoke Guide to Developing Software
==============================================

June 26, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pokayoke)

* * * * *

I’ve put together a new guide for developing software, from idea to
architectural details. The idea was to combine all the good ideas I’d
heard from various areas of software development into a single, concise
document. I’ve also added some new stuff — I think my need/idea model is
actually a pretty good way to generate startup (and other) ideas.

[The Pokayoke Guide to Developing Software](http://pokayokeguide.com/)

I’m eager for suggestions and feedback.


Thinking Clearly About Piece-Work
=================================

July 5, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/piecework)

* * * * *

My friend Jonathan Zittrain has been working on a book about how the
return of piece-work will destroy America. As someone who kind of misses
piece-work, it made me want to think through the issues involved.

Because, in the real world, competition is imperfect, when a company
sells something it earns a surplus. That surplus then must be divided
between capital and labor, or more concretely, the company and the
employee. The terms of distribution are determined by the employment
agreement (i.e. how much the employee will get paid).

If labor has all the power, it will want almost all of the surplus, so
it’d demand an employee agreement where it gets paid a big chunk per
good produced — this is basically piece-work. If capital has all the
power, it will want to pay employees barely enough to stay alive and be
able to show up for work — this is basically wages. So, to a first
approximation, wages are what you get when capital is in charge and
piece-work is what you get when labor is in charge.

But there are some additional considerations. The transaction costs for
capital are relatively low — you can invest in a whole bunch of
companies at a time, whereas you can really only do a couple jobs at a
time (or usually just one) and it’s quite painful to find another one.
So employees also want insurance — they want to guarantee they’ll keep
getting paid even when the market for the stuff they produce declines.
Again, we can imagine two extremes: if labor is in charge, it’ll want a
job for life, where getting downsized is inconceivable; if capital is in
charge, it’ll want to employ people for exactly as long as their
marginal product is profitable — which means staffing up in booms and
downsizing freely in busts (and not just business cycle booms and busts
— companies want to hire lots of temporary workers for Christmas, for
example).

Now obviously a job for life doesn’t make a ton of sense in a piece-work
world. If AT&T has guaranteed you a job for life with steady wages, then
it makes sense for it to invest in retraining you for some different
part of the business when mechanical telephone switches get replaced by
computer servers. It’s less clear how this would work in a piece-work
deal. But the fact is there’s no reason the insurance part should be
tied to the wages. In Denmark, for example, if your job disappears the
government simply pays you 90% of your old salary until you find a new
one (up to some cap, of course). There’s no reason piece-work can’t
coexist with this kind of social insurance system, which would seem to
be the choice of our all-powerful labor.

But that’s treating labor as a monolithic entity. The third thing wages
do is collapse differences in pay *between* workers. For example, it’s
well established that programmer productivity varies by an order of
magnitude — the best programmers at a company can be *ten times* as
productive as the worst programmers — but I’ve never heard of a company
where programmer pay varies by anywhere near that much. Really great
programmers might be paid double or perhaps even triple the worst
programmers, but I’ve never heard of anything close to a 10x difference.

The one place where you do see these really huge differences is in CEO
pay, but even this isn’t really a counterexample since CEO is a job with
no intra-company reference class. That is, it’s not like companies will
have one CEO getting paid \$1.2M and a another getting paid \$12M
(indeed, I’d guess companies with co-CEOs find them getting paid the
same amount) — instead, the order-of-magnitude differences are all found
across companies.

But order-of-magnitude differences are totally possible with piece-work,
especially the kind of intellectual piece-work that Zittrain is
concerned with. Krugman has bragged that he “writes faster than anyone
in journalism” and it’s quite possible to imagine him turning out
columns in a tenth the time of Barbara Ehrenreich (who turned down the
NYT op-ed columnist job because it was too time-consuming). So wages
might be a way of quietly redistributing money from the speedy Krugmans
to the dawdling Ehrenreichs. But just as with social insurance, you can
imagine this role being taken up by the government instead: through
progressive taxation.

Now according to classic economic theory, these changes wouldn’t just be
details of style, but would increase the size of the overall pie. And,
on the squishy side, they’d provide much greater scope for human
freedom. Assuming I was guaranteed a decent wage either way, I’d far
rather be able to stay up late working one night in exchange for blowing
off work the next. Not to mention getting to work the hours I want, from
the place I want, in the way I want, etc.

Now the practical fact is that most jobs don’t have a concrete enough
product to be amenable to piece-work. They’re a mixture of all sorts of
different tasks, require interaction with a specific group of other
people, and have all sorts of other features that kind of force them to
be your usual office job. But none of that applies to Zittrain — he’s
talking about jobs that are *already* piece-work and arguing that they
shouldn’t be. But it seems to me like, if you’re on the side of labor,
your preferred solution should be more social insurance and progressive
taxation instead.


Libertarianism and the State
============================

July 6, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tabarroklibertarianism)

* * * * *

*This is a parody of [a post by Alex Tabarrok defending employer
tyranny](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/libertarianism-and-the-workplace-ii.html).*

Over at Marginal Revolution, Alex Tabarrok and Tyler Cowen are upset
about what they call lack of freedom in the country. They give a grab
bag of peculiar examples such as how people can be arrested for smoking
drugs, [not paying
debts](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/more-on-debtors-prisons.html),
and, once in prison, can be [forbidden from reading
books](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/solitary-confinement.html),
and more.

In other words, the MRers have discovered that the most basic
governments are sovereign which means that citizens can be put in jail
for just about any reason. Simply put, an government can arrest you if
they don’t like you. This is a surprise?

The MRers do not adequately acknowledge that citizens have the same
rights as politicians. Citizens can leave the country for any reason and
they can refuse to enter any country. If you don’t like the politices of
the United States, or Australia or Venezuela you don’t have to live
there or even visit. Indeed, citizens have more rights than politicians
since citizens are not subject to judicial review; that is, politicians
are typically prohibited from passing laws against certain political
viewpoints but citizens are not prohibited from only entering countries
where those viewpoints are marginal.

If you think that the freedom to leave is without value, bear in mind
that under dictatorships and totalitarian states governments could
prevent citizens from leaving and from moving. The freedom to leave was
hard won. We should not disparage the liberation brought by the right to
exit.

Turning to the economics, the MRers are so outraged by an government’s
legal possibilities that they fail to notice that most governments do
not in fact arrest people for smoking drugs or for failing to pay debts.
Why not? The reason is that these rights are often more valuable to the
citizen than to the politician and thus both citizen and politician can
be made better off if the citizen keeps the rights. If the politician
values the right more than the citizen then the politician buys the
right with lower taxes or less regulation in other areas. If the citizen
values the right more than the politician then the citizen retains the
right at an otherwise higher tax rate. The politician gets the right
only when the politician pays.

This is not to say that abuses do not occur, they do, as in all
relationships and on both sides, but the MRers lump abuses and mutually
profitable exchanges together–that’s dangerous because in regulating
abuses it is very easy to do away with mutually profitable exchanges.

The greater the productivity of citizens and the higher their incomes
the less citizens will be willing to sell rights for lower taxes (i.e.
the more willing they will be to pay for better regulatory conditions).
Citizens gain more autonomy as they and their society become more
productive. Thus, the best protector of citizen autonomy is high
productivity and economic growth.

To understand freedom and true coercion let us remember that American
citizens have the freedom to leave and visit other countries, a freedom
that gun, barbed wire and electrified fence deny to many millions of
less fortunate citizens from around the world.


Thoughts on *Citizen Kane*
==========================

July 8, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kane)

* * * * *

In *Three Uses of the Knife*, Mamet quotes Stanislavsky as saying there
are two kinds of play. The kind where the thing is absolutely perfect,
the film ends and you shout “Bravo!” and you’re elated walking out to
the car and then have forgotten the thing entirely by the time you get
home. And the kind where something’s not quite right and so it sticks
with you, gnaws at you, because the notes don’t quite resolve.

*Citizen Kane* is definitely the second kind of movie.

To be sure, it had its moments of sheer genius. Number one, in my mind,
is juxtaposing Welles’ performance as the young Kane gracefully dancing
with a showgirl at an office party against him as a much older Kane
stumbling in the effort to trash a room in his Florida mansion. In both
cases, there’s an absolutely beautiful physicality to the performance
and the notion that the same actor was capable of doing both at the same
age is nothing short of stunning.

The film is widely-hailed for the cinematographic innovation of *deep
focus*, using tricks with projections and lenses to keep foreground and
background in focus at the same time. But the effect is even more
interesting than the technique: the film is filled with long shots where
tons of action goes on through staging but the camera never cuts away. A
character in the foreground talks to a character in the background, they
pace, they swap places, and the camera might pan a bit (but usually not)
but it never cuts.

And when it does cut, it always cuts in a sort of overlapping way. The
standard modern movie shot is the over-over-two-shot: characters A and B
are talking, facing each other; the screen alternates between a shot of
A filmed over the shoulder of B and vice versa. You can clearly see the
people but you lose all sense of the space that they’re in, since your
perspective is constantly flipping back and forth.

*Kane* does pretty much the opposite, almost every new shot overlaps in
some way with the previous one, so you never lose your place. A shot
might go from wide to tight or tight to wide or, in some cases, shift
slightly to the left or right, but it almost never completely flips
direction, and when it does (as when Kane enters the newsroom for the
first time) it flips around a very noticeable piece of the set, so it’s
extremely obvious what happened.

This may have been the result of some deep insecurity about confusing an
audience mostly used to watching plays from fixed seats, but I like it.
The result is to give the film a tremendous physicality that makes it
all feel much more substantial. This sort of thing was apparently
extremely common in the early days of film, which makes me wonder why
it’s so rare now. ([The main modern exception is *There Will Be
Blood*](http://www.davidbordwell.net/blog/2011/02/14/watching-you-watch-there-will-be-blood/),
which was intentionally a period piece.)

But even among older films *Kane* distinguishes itself: most films have
clear staging because they’re simply staged as plays, with a static
camera watching a flat scene. *Kane*’s sets, innovatively, have ceilings
and a full complement of walls and while action feels staged in them
they never really feel like they’re on a stage.

But in the scheme of things, it has to be admitted, these are small
things. *Kane* suffers from far bigger problems. The first, and most
blatant, is that aside from Welles the cast simply cannot act. Well,
they cannot act in movies, at least. Were this a radio show, they would
have been fantastic — close your eyes and you hear nothing but strong,
stirring performances. Were they on stage, they likely also would have
done just fine. But this was their first role in film and apparently no
one stopped to tell them that in the movies, we can see your face.

Their faces are consistently either blank, as if they forgot they were
supposed to move it to and not just their voice, or overwrought, as if
they were exaggerating their features so they would carry through to the
cheap seats. In either case, watching them destroys any sense of realism
that the careful shot construction has built up and brings the whole
thing to the verge of melodrama.

The other big problem is the script. The “spiraling” effect of
overlapping tellings of Kane’s life (a bit like the overlapping cuts, I
suppose?) may have been a brilliant formal innovation, but it doesn’t
really add much to the film. Instead of following the through-line of a
strong and compellng story, we’re constantly bouncing back and forth in
time, with interruptions at key moments. What do these interruptions get
us? As far as I can tell, they just slow the film down.

(The best argument I can make for them is that they emphasize the fact
that Kane drove those who were closest to him away. This makes some
sense for Susan and Jed, but Bernstein is still loyal to him and
Thatcher is dead, so what does that emphasize?)

The modern excuse for this kind of early flash-forward is to set up a
big mystery which only the full story can resolve (*Damages* is an
egregious example). *Kane* kind of does this with the famous “Rosebud”
(although since we see this first-hand, it doesn’t explain why the whole
investigative-obituarist plotline is necessary). Perhaps it was just
terribly spoiled for me, but Rosebud did not feel like a particularly
compelling mystery. Especially with all the questions raised by the
“News on the March” sequence, it was really the last of the things I was
curious about. (And the notion that an editor would be so curious about
it as to waste that much money on an answer really belies the
presentation of journalism in the rest of the film.)

(I’m also upset that the film wasted a great opportunity for the ending.
It currently ends with a speech by the investigative obituarist, saying
that he never figured out what “Rosebud” was but even if he did it was
probably just another ill-fitting piece in the man’s great jigsaw
puzzle. Then the camera pulls out and cuts to a wider shot and cuts
again and eventually cuts to a whole new scene where someone pulls a
sled out of a pile and throws into into a fire and then we cut to the
sled and see the name “Rosebud” as it gets licked with flames. The
obvious ending is to have the camera pull back in one steady shot as we
hear the jigsaw puzzle speech until amidst this enormous pile of junk
the sled is just in foreground, with “Rosebud” written on its side, as
the gaggle of journalists wanders off in background. What’s all this
*deep focus* stuff for if you’re not going to use it for a movie-making
shot like that!)

The film does have some great bits about journalism, but it also has
some weird lapses. There’s hardly anything of substance about the
Spanish-American War, which I would have thought was the most
interesting tale of Hearst’s life. The film is weirdly afraid to leave
the country (it follows Kane to Chicago, but not to Europe) or even the
building (I guess street scenes would have been too expensive), making
it feel a bit cooped-up and claustrophobic.

But the most frustrating thing, script-wise, is that it raises the grand
questions of ambition and money and power and answers them with just a
giant muddle. Kane was incapable of loving but desperate to be loved,
we’re told repeatedly, but what kind of sense does that make? There are
some great moments: in an early precursor of “Fair and Balanced”, Kane
prints a brave “Statement of Principles” promising to always tell the
truth on his front page, just above a story about a murder he invented.
But this is on day one! There is no sense that power corrupts or even,
as Caro would have it, that power reveals. Kane just stay the same
throughout and as his means allow him to grow the size of his gestures,
he also grows the size of his failures. Maybe this is an interesting
philosophical point (don’t count on scale to save you?) but a story so
static doesn’t work particularly well as drama. Caro would have told it
as an epic rise and fall. Kane would have told it as an epic rise. But
Welles just tells it as a flatline. It’s like a Caro subject without the
Caro, or the subject.

I put this criticism last because it’s the one I’m most uncomfortable
about. Maybe Welles was just so far ahead of his time that he decided to
critique the next century of biopics in advance. People don’t actually
change, *Kane* tells us; they just play out the same mistakes on larger
and larger scales, over and over again, in patterns big and small. And
if so, I take it all back and this critique is actually a tremendous
credit. But it sure doesn’t feel like it’s trying to be a
deconstructionist film.


Is Awkwardness Avoidable?
=========================

July 23, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awkwardoffice)

* * * * *

In his brilliant book
*[Awkwardness](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B005HKROXE)*, Adam Kotsko
analyzes the US version of the television show *The Office*, concluding
it, unlike its British counterpart, shies away from the emancipatory
potential of awkwardness by concluding it’s ultimately the result of
inherently awkward individuals.

As his key example, he cites the arc of Charles Miner (*The Wire*’s
Idris Elba), a high-powered Dunder Mifflin executive who visits the
Scranton branch for a short while as part of his attempts to improve
northeast sales. Miner’s arrival forces Jim into a series of awkward
comic mishaps, thus suggesting Jim’s normal level of cool isn’t just
because he’s a naturally cool person but only because he’s particularly
well-suited to his normal situation. But Miner ultimately reveals
himself to be overly aggressive, thereby, Kotsko argues, showing Jim’s
awkwardness was merely a result of Miner being a fundamentally awkward
person and thus withdrawing the tentative suggestion that awkwardness
might actually be situational.

I think this is a misreading that shows the limits of a theory of
awkwardness that lacks a notion of competence. For this arc shows
precisely the opposite of what Kotsko says it does: it shows that
awkwardness *is* fundamentally situational.

Miner’s addition to the series marks the rare appearance of a character
that is more competent than Jim. However much Jim may feel himself above
the petty stressors of the Scranton office, Miner is far above that,
executing with a similar level of suave at a much higher rung in the
organization. When Jim comes face-to-face with a superior talent, it
immediately reduces him to the level of gibbering awkwardness his
coworkers are always finding themselves in, thereby demonstrating Jim’s
level of comfort isn’t an innate character trait, but simply the result
of being well-adapted to his absurd environment.

The reveal of Miner’s aggression is not an undercutting but an emphasis
of this theme. How did Miner get to be so cool? Was he just born with
even more innate coolness than Jim and thus is able to be awkward in
fewer situations? On the contrary, this coda reveals. Miner got to where
he is through an aggressive ambition. His relentless striving has forced
him to be competent in more and more business situations so he can move
up the corporate ladder.

*The Office* operates under a sort of Peter Principle of awkwardness.
[The Peter Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Principle)
says employees are promoted to the level of their incompetence (since as
long as they remain competent, they keep getting promoted). *The Office*
demonstrates that being incompetent is awkward, so people are thereby
promoted to the level of their awkwardness. Thus Michael Scott (Steve
Carrell), who is actually a quite talented and thoroughly comfortable
salesman, gets promoted to regional manager, where he is an awkward and
incompetent dolt. We can only assume that Miner is normally at the level
of his awkwardness as well; he only seems cool when slumming it in
Scranton, the same way that Jim only gets to seem cool by being
unambitious enough to persist in a job he is obviously too good for. It
is our ambition that makes us awkward, the show argues.

This is emphasized in the later plot where David Wallace (Andy Buckley),
who appears as a confident corporate CFO in earlier seasons, gets made
redundant in Dunder Mifflin’s acquisition by Sabre and is forced to
retire to his suburban mansion with his generous severance package.
Without a corporate ladder to climb but with his ambition intact, he now
finds himself working on a startup (producing a vacuum for children’s
toys called “Suck It”). But his competence as an upper executive is
worthless as a startup founder and makes him so painfully awkward that
even Michael can’t stomach it. (Later, when Wallace returns to the
corporate world, he’s immediately unawkward again.)

The clear message is the opposite of Kotsko’s reading: we are all
awkward when we’re out of our depth; our only escape from awkwardness is
to develop a competence for a particular situation. But even that is
short-lived: our ambition will drive us to leave such non-awkward
comforts for the next challenge — and even if we don’t, the vagaries of
economic forces may still push us into a role we are ill-suited for. The
only refuge from this pervasive awkwardness is the pervasive boredom of
unambition.

P.S. Kotsko’s followup, *[Why We Love
Sociopaths](http://books.theinfo.org/go/178099091X)* is even better.


What Happens in *The Dark Knight Rises*
=======================================

July 29, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr)

* * * * *

*Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow.^[1](#fn:fnc)^*

The film begins by asking: what happens if conservative law-and-order
policies actually worked? The answer, we quickly learn, is that it
destroys the people behind them. Without anything to fight, Bruce Wayne
is just a reclusive withered husk, while Commissioner Gordon is actually
going to be fired. Given that these are two of the film’s most
sympathetic characters, we naturally tend to deplore this situation. And
so the film’s first key point: the champions of law-and-order do not
truly want to succeed at their stated mission.

In a world without (street) crime, the police become merely the
errand-boys for the wealthy, not bothering to refocus their efforts on
corporate or economic criminals (like Daggett). Gordon sighs at having
such quotidian assignments as tracking down wayward members of Congress;
meanwhile no one even considers punishing the same Congressman for
sexually harassing Selina Kyle. As a result, economic inequality grows
unchecked and Gotham’s citizens are saved from physical attack only to
suffer economic depredation (some literally moving into the sewers in
the desperate search for a job).

The whole thing is the mirror of the beginning of the first film, in
which Wayne’s Keynesian Supertrain project to boost the city’s economy
is felled by random street crime. Now the ending of street crime is
ultimately felled by the failure to create an economy that works for
all. ([Ra’s al
Ghul](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0372784/quotes?qt0469932): “Over the
ages, our weapons have grown more sophisticated. With Gotham, we tried a
new one: Economics. … Create enough hunger and everyone becomes a
criminal.”)

With the state having withered away to little more than a nightwatchman
for the wealthy, private charity is all that’s left to fill the widening
gap between the horribly poor and the terribly wealthy. But this is
ultimately a failure, because most of the wealthy philanthropists are
more concerned with their own self-image than actual impact. Worse,
those who are making a difference are forced to cancel their charitable
programs when the downturn (and questionable business decisions) cause
their profits to slump.

Into this Rawlsian nightmare walks Bane, a thug who escaped Middle
Eastern extraordinary rendition to train with Arab terrorists before
heading to Gotham. There he’s building an underground vanguard party,
constructing a new society literally underneath the decadent old one.

Bane’s activists crash the Gotham Stock Exchange (which is exactly like
the NYSE except with a gaudy ticker on the door), using their
proletarian roles (bike messenger, shoe shiner, cement mixer) to seize
control of the markets and expropriate the wealth of Bruce Wayne, the
city’s richest man. Having a real enemy revitalizes Wayne, leading him
to return to action as Batman and attempt to catch the criminals.

But with the Gordon Era on its way out, the police are more concerned
with stopping the vigilante Batman than the expropriators, letting them
get away. Thus just as Batman’s success in stopping crime made himself
unnecessary, his clumsy failure is what allows him to return.

The activists strike a tactical alliance with certain deluded members of
the capitalist class, using their expropriation to engineer a hostile
takeover of Wayne Enterprises, eventually allowing them (with a small
amount of violence) to take possession of a nuclear weapon.

That way, when the vanguardists use proletarian sabotage to secede and
declare independence, the US can’t intervene and instead leaves the
newly-independent city to its own devices.^[2](#fn:fp)^ (Once again,
Wayne has made it possible for his enemies to succeed — they never could
have done it without his nuke.) Bane quickly dismantles the repressive
state, releasing the prisoners locked up without parole under the harsh
law-and-order regime. In the resulting anarchy, the people quickly do
what the old establishment wouldn’t: string up the bankers (sometimes
literally) and redistribute their wealth. (Their show-trials are the
mirror to the establishment’s treatment of organized crime under the
Dent Act, harshly punishing the criminals and seizing their assets with
limited due process.)

Emphasizing that all power ultimately comes from the force of the fist,
the police try to reassert their control in a climactic street brawl
against Bane’s vanguardists. However, the situation only gets worse for
them as it’s revealed that Talia, the daughter of the Arab terrorist
leader, has arranged the nuke to detonate unavoidably.

Batman apparently finally realizes that he’s only creating the crime he
tries so hard to stop ([as The Joker told
him](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YPuToZT0vfY), “I don’t want to kill
you! What would I do without you?…you complete me”), so he fakes his own
death as he disposes of the bomb. He ends the film in Italy, apparently
leading a normal life with an attractive reformed
catburglar.^[3](#fn:fn1)^

As Neil Kandalgaonkar [notes in
comments](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr#c1):

> If Bruce Wayne had never used his resources to ‘improve’ matters,
> Gotham would be a thriving (albeit often corrupt) city. Instead it has
> suffered from terrorist attacks killing prominent city officials,
> destroying most bridges, devastating several public buildings, giant
> smoking holes in the ground, and even ruined the real estate value of
> the more desirable neighborhoods.
>
> The predictable result, not shown in the movie, is capital flight from
> a city which embraced law and order by any and all means, and instead
> got anarchy and ruin. The billionaire vigilante himself flees the
> city, having secured his fortune with offshore banking accounts.

* * * * *

1.  Thanks especially to [Aaron Bady’s
    review](http://thenewinquiry.com/blogs/zunguzungu/do-not-go-gentle-into-that-dark-knight/)
    for clarifying my thinking on some of these points. [↩](#fnref:fnc)

2.  Unlike with Cuba, Vietnam, Nicaragua, etc. [↩](#fnref:fp)

3.  Admittedly, this move is somewhat undercut by the fact that before
    he left he decided to set up a sequel series by sending a promising
    young cop (whose middle name turns out to be Robin) on a mission
    that ends with Robin watch a top policeman prefer to let the entire
    population of the city die rather than disobey outdated bureaucratic
    orders. Disgusted, Robin throws away his badge and sets off to
    continue Batman’s tactics of vigilantism, inheriting the
    Batcave. [↩](#fnref:fn1)




What do startup founders want?
==============================

August 5, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfwants)

* * * * *

[日本語](http://www.yamdas.org/column/technique/sfwantsj.html)

To oversimplify greatly for a second:

People in New York want money. People in Los Angeles want fame. People
in DC want power. People in Miami want to have fun. But what do people
in San Francisco want?

It’s not money. Sure, a startup that sells for a lot of money is nice,
but it’s clearly not the goal. I think few startup founders would feel
good about building something worthless and then tricking a big company
into buying it for a lot of money.

It’s not fame. Sure, Mark Zuckerberg is famous now, but he actually
seems more annoyed about that than anything.

It’s not power, or else the founders of GitHub would look ridiculous for
giving all their power away to their employees. Paul Buchheit didn’t
write Gmail because he wanted to control the actions of its users.

It’s certainly not having fun. (Although, like most hard things,
startups are actually surprisingly fun.)

No, I think the thing startup founders want is *importance*.

Importance is a bit like power, but heavily diluted. Power is about
being able to make people do something they wouldn’t otherwise do. The
Instagram founders weren’t in it for power: they have very little
interest in making people take photos they wouldn’t otherwise take. But
nonetheless, their decisions had a great deal of importance for their
users. If they decided to put ads in their app or remove a favorite
filter, millions of people’s lives suddenly get a little bit more
annoying.

Because your tiny decisions have huge impacts on people, when you’re
important everyone wants to hear what you have to say. You can go to TED
and WEF and the audience wants to come up to talk to you, not so much
because they want something from you, but because what you think has a
big impact on their lives.

This is why selling a startup is so hard. It gets you money and fame but
it means losing a lot of your importance. Now when you go to TED, you’re
a has-been; you just answer questions about what the good old days are
like.

Importance is different from impact. Tim Berners-Lee (inventor of the
Web) had a huge impact in the world, but he’s not particularly
important. He decided long ago that the Semantic Web was the next big
thing, but few people cared, because practically there was very little
he could actually do about it.

Dick Costolo (CEO of Twitter), by contrast, is pretty important. If he
decides that Twitter needs a “consistent user experience”, he can shut
down apps millions of people use each day, destroying the companies that
build them.

We all know the dangers of wanting money or power. But the dangers of
wanting importance are little-discussed. Importance tends to require
centralizing things, which means restraining innovation and leaving
yourself open to the demands of actual power.

Imagine Tim had built the Web the same way folks built Twitter. All our
web pages would be would be hosted by a single company, accessed through
an API that they defined and could change at whim. Web applications
would be far weaker than they are today (since it would be hard to store
anything interesting on TimCo’s servers) and powerful corporations would
constantly be knocking people offline permanently for various
terms-of-service violations (no trademark infringement! no hate
speech!).

Tim would be much more important in this world, but I don’t think the
rest of us would be better off.


Do I have too much faith in science?
====================================

August 10, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sciencefaith)

* * * * *

We live in a society where it’s almost impossible to give science too
much credit. Ever since the atom bomb and the space race, it’s just been
taken for granted that civilization advances through the progress of
science. Science—we are told—grows our food, cures our diseases, creates
our new technologies, and just generally propels the human race forward.

If science is the engine of progress, then those who have not been
captured under its spell must be dusty relics of prejudice and caprice.
Fields under the sway of hidebound tradition must be bulldozed and
renovated in the image of science. Thus doctors, instead of making
decisions by random whim, must be forced to practice “evidence-based
medicine” where all their prescriptions are backed by randomized
controlled trials. Policymakers, instead of just being bleeding-heart
do-gooders, must temper their enthusiasm for regulation by doing
cost-benefit analyses to see if their proposals make sense. Managers,
instead of following their intuition, must subject their strategies to
rigorous experiment—through A/B tests in the market.

But what’s weird about this mania for science is how unscientific it all
is. As far as I know, no studies have shown that evidence-based medicine
leads to better patient outcomes or that companies which practice
comprehensive A/B testing are more profitable than those which follow
their intuition. And the evidence that science is responsible for stuff
like increased life expectancy is [surprisingly
weak](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0060975199).

But there’s such a mania for science that even asking these questions
seems absurd. How could there possibly be evidence against
evidence-based medicine? The whole idea seems like a contradiction in
terms. But it is not.

Recent decades have seen science encroach on the kitchen, with
scientific approaches to cooking and cuisine. Where other chefs might
simply follow instructions they found on a yellowing scrap of paper, the
new modernists seek to understand the physics behind their actions. This
approach has led to some interesting new techniques, but it’s also led
us to understand that some of those silly traditions aren’t so silly
after all.

Eggs, for example, were often beaten in copper bowls. Why copper bowls?
Chefs might have been able to give you some kind of reason, but it would
have sounded silly to scientific ears. But the modernists discovered
that the ions in the copper ended up forming complex bonds with the
conalbumin in the eggs.

This was not something that chefs had ever established as scientific
knowledge—no aproned Isaac Newton ever discovered this was the right way
to cook the eggs—but it was knowledge chefs had nonetheless. It was, in
Polyani’s phrase, tacit knowledge, part of the things society genuinely
knew but was never able to write down or clearly prove.

Scientism systematically destroys tacit knowledge. If chefs were forced
to follow “evidence-based cooking”, not using anything special like a
copper bowl until their was a peer-reviewed double-blind randomized
controlled trial proving its effectiveness, the result surely would be
worse food. So why is it crazy to believe the same attitude leads to
worse medicine?

In business, too, scientism could be quite destructive. Can Steve Jobs
provide a proof for the rightness of every iPhone feature? Can Doug
Bowman do a scientific experiment to [justify his every shade of
blue](http://stopdesign.com/archive/2009/03/20/goodbye-google.html)?
Forcing them to could well make their work far worse instead of better.

Scientism even fails just within our own heads. If you’re struggling
with a decision, we’re taught to approach it more “scientifically”, by
systematically enumerating pros and cons and trying to weight and
balance them. That’s what Richard Feynman would do, right? Well, studies
have shown that this sort of explicit approach repeatable leads to
*worse* decisions than just going with your gut. Why? Presumably for the
same reason: your gut is full of tacit knowledge that it’s tough to
articulate and write down. Just focusing on the stuff you can make
explicit means throwing away everything else you know—destroying your
tacit knowledge.

Of course, there’s no guarantee that just trusting your gut will work
either. Intuition and tradition are often just as wrong as scientific
cluelessness. And in the cases where they genuinely have little to
contribute, throwing them away (or quarantining it until it’s proven by
scientific test) might not be such a bad idea. But I’ve always just
assumed that this was *always* true—that tradition and intuition had
nothing to contribute, unless carefully coached by scientific practice.
That science was the only way to get knowledge, rather than just another
way of codifying it. Now, instead of throwing it all away, I’m now
thinking I ought to spend more time finding ways to harness all that
tacit knowledge.


Believe you can change
======================

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck)

* * * * *

*This post is part two of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

Carol Dweck was obsessed with failure. You know how some people just
seem to succeed at everything they do, while others seem helpless,
doomed to a life of constant failure? Dweck noticed that too — and she
was determined to figure out why. So she began watching kids, trying to
see if she could spot the difference between the two groups.

In a 1978 study with Carol Diener, she gave kids various puzzles and
recorded what they said as they tried to solve them. Very quickly, the
helpless kids started blaming themselves: “I’m getting confused,” one
said; “I never did have a good rememory,” another explained.

But the puzzles kept coming — and they kept getting harder. “This isn’t
fun anymore,” the kids cried. But still, there were more puzzles.

The kids couldn’t take it anymore. “I give up,” they insisted. They
started talking about other things, trying to take their mind off the
onslaught of tricky puzzles. “There is a talent show this weekend, and I
am going to be Shirley Temple,” one girl said. Dweck just gave them even
harder puzzles.

Now the kids started getting silly, almost as if they could hide their
failure by making it clear they weren’t trying in the first place.
Despite repeatedly being told it was incorrect, one boy just kept
choosing brown as his answer, saying “Chocolate cake, chocolate
cake.”^[1](#fn:dweck78)^

Maybe these results aren’t surprising. If you’ve ever tried to play a
board game with kids, you’ve probably seen them say all these things and
more (Dweck appears to be missing the part where they pick up the game
board and throw all the pieces on the floor, then run away screaming).

But what shocked her — and changed the course of her career — was the
behavior of the successful kids. “Everyone has a role model, someone who
pointed the way at a critical moment in their lives,” she later wrote.
“These children were my role models. They obviously knew something I
didn’t and I was determined to figure it out.”^[2](#fn:mindset1)^

Dweck, like many adults, had learned to hide her frustration and anger,
to politely say “I’m not sure I want to play this anymore” instead of
knocking over the board. She figured the successful kids would be the
same — they’d have tactics for coping with failure instead of getting
beaten down by it.

But what she found was radically different. The successful kids didn’t
just live with failure, they *loved* it! When the going got tough, they
didn’t start blaming themselves; they licked their lips and said “I love
a challenge.” They’d say stuff like “The harder it gets the harder I
need to try.”

Instead of complaining it wasn’t fun when the puzzles got harder, they’d
psych themselves up, saying “I’ve almost got it now” or “I did it
before, I can do it again.” One kid, upon being a given a really hard
puzzle, one that was supposed to be obviously impossible to solve, just
looked up at the experimenter with a smile and said, “You know, I was
*hoping* this would be informative.”^[3](#fn:dweckleggett)^

*What was wrong with them?*

* * * * *

The difference, Dweck discovered, was one of mindset. Dweck had always
thought “human qualities were carved in stone. You were smart or you
weren’t, and failure meant you weren’t.” That was why the helpless kids
couldn’t take it when they started failing. It just reminded them they
sucked (they easily got confused, they had “a bad rememory”). Of course
it wasn’t fun anymore — why would it be fun to get constantly reminded
you’re a failure? No wonder they tried to change the subject. Dweck
called this the “fixed mindset” — the belief that your abilities are
fixed and that the world is just a series of tests that show you how
good you are.

The successful kids believed precisely the opposite: that everything
came through effort and that the world was full of interesting
challenges that could help you learn and grow. (Dweck called this the
“growth mindset.”) That’s why they were so thrilled by the harder
puzzles — the easier ones weren’t any sort of challenge, there was
nothing you could learn from them. But the really tough ones? Those were
fascinating — a new skill to develop, a new problem to conquer. In later
experiments, kids even asked to take puzzles home so they could work on
them some more.^[4](#fn:muellerdweck)^

It took a seventh-grader to explain it to her: “I think intelligence is
something you have to work for…it isn’t just given to you… Most kids, if
they’re not sure of an answer, will not raise their hand… But what I
usually do is raise my hand, because if I’m wrong, then my mistake will
be corrected. Or I will raise my hand and say… ‘I don’t get this. Can
you help me?’ Just by doing that I’m increasing my
intelligence.”^[5](#fn:m2)^

In the fixed mindset, success comes from proving how great you are.
Effort is a bad thing — if you have to try hard and ask questions, you
obviously can’t be very good. When you find something you *can* do well,
you want to do it over and over, to show how good you are at it.

In the growth mindset, success comes from growing. Effort is what it’s
all about — it’s what makes you grow. When you get good at something,
you put it aside and look for something harder so that you can keep
growing.

Fixed-mindset people feel smart when they don’t make mistakes,
growth-mindset people feel smart when they struggle with something for a
long time and then finally figure it out. Fixies try to blame the world
when things go bad, growthers look to see what they can change about
themselves. Fixies are afraid to try hard — because if they fail, it
means they’re a failure. Growthers are afraid of not trying.

* * * * *

As Dweck continued her research, she kept finding this difference in all
sorts of places. In relationships, growth-mindset people looked for
partners who would push them to be better, fixies just wanted someone
who would put them on a pedestal (and got into terrible fights when they
hit problems). Growther CEOs keep looking for new products and ways to
improve, fixies cut research and tried to squeeze profits from old
successes. Even in sports, growther athletes got better and better
through constant practice, while fixies blamed their atrophying skills
on everyone around them.

But Dweck applied a growth mindset to the question of mindset — and
discovered that your mindset could itself be changed. Even small
interventions — like telling students they were doing well because they
tried hard, rather than because they were smart — had huge effects. With
more work, she could change totally fixed-mindset people into fervent
growth-mindset ones.

She herself changed, converting from a fervent fixed-mindsetter, always
looking for excuses to prove how smart she was, to a growther, looking
for new challenges. It was hard: “since I was taking more risks, I might
look back over the day and see all the mistakes and setbacks. And feel
miserable. [You feel like a zero]… you want to rush right out and rack
up some high numbers.” But she resisted the urge — and became a leading
psychologist instead.^[6](#fn:m3)^

* * * * *

The first step to getting better is believing you *can* get better. In
her book, *[Mindset](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0345472322)*, Dweck
explains how to start talking back to your fixed mindset. The fixed
mindset says, “What if you fail? You’ll be a failure.” The growth
mindset replies, “Most successful people had failures along the
way.”^[7](#fn:site)^

Now when I first heard about this work, I just thought: that’s nice, but
I already do all this. I believe fervently that intelligence can change
and that talents can be learned. Indeed, I’d say I’m almost
pathologically growth mindset. But even I began to notice there are some
things I have a fixed mindset about.

For example, I used to think I was introverted. Everyone had always told
me that you were either an extroverted person or an introverted person.
From a young age, I was quite shy and bookish, so it seemed obvious: I
was an introvert.

But as I’ve grown, I’ve found that’s hardly the end of the story. I’ve
started to get good at leading a conversation or cracking people up with
a joke. I *like* telling stories at a party a story or buzzing about a
room saying ‘hi’ to people. I get a rush from it! Sure, I’m still not
the most party-oriented person I know, but I no longer think we fit into
any neat introversion/extroversion buckets.

Growth mindset has become a kind of safe word for my partner and I.
Whenever we feel the other person getting defensive or refusing to try
something because “I’m not any good at it”, we say “Growth mindset!” and
try to approach the problem as a chance to grow, rather than a test of
our abilities. It’s no longer scary, it’s just another project to work
on.

Just like life itself.

**Next in this series:** [Look at yourself
objectively](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)

* * * * *

1.  Carol I. Diener and Carol S. Dweck, “[An Analysis of Learned
    Helplessness: Continuous Changes in Performance, Strategy, and
    Achievement Cognitions Following
    Failure](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.36.5.451),” *Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology*, **36**:5 (May 1978),
    451—462. [↩](#fnref:dweck78)

2.  Carol Dweck, *Mindset: The New Psychology of Success* (2007),
    3. [↩](#fnref:mindset1)

3.  Carol S. Dweck and Ellen L. Leggett, “[A Social-Cognitive Approach
    to Motivation and
    Personality](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256),”
    *Psychological Review*, **95**:2 (1988),
    256—273. [↩](#fnref:dweckleggett)

4.  Claudia M. Mueller and Carol Dweck, “[Praise for Intelligence Can
    Undermine Children’s Motivation and
    Performance](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.33),” *Journal
    of Personality and Social Psychology*, **75**:1 (July 1998),
    33–52. [↩](#fnref:muellerdweck)

5.  *Mindset*, 17. [↩](#fnref:m2)

6.  *Mindset*, 225. [↩](#fnref:m3)

7.  Carol Dweck, “[How can you change from a fixed mindset to a growth
    mindset?](http://mindsetonline.com/changeyourmindset/firststeps/index.html),”
    *mindsetonline.com* ([visited
    2012-08-18](http://www.webcitation.org/6A0ml0Csy)). [↩](#fnref:site)




Raw Nerve
=========

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve)

* * * * *

This is a series of pieces on getting better at life.

1.  [Take a step back](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/stepback)
2.  [Believe you can change](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck)
3.  [Look at yourself objectively](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)
4.  [Lean into the pain](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dalio)
5.  [Confront reality](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/anders)
6.  [Cherish mistakes](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/geremiah)
7.  [Fix the machine, not the person](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/nummi)

The best posts are probably 2 and 4.

Bonus pieces:

-   [What are the optimal biases to
    overcome?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/optimalbias)

Related reading:

-   *[The Flinch](http://books.theinfo.org/go/B0062Q7S3S)* (for part 4)
-   *[Everything is Obvious](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0307951790)*
-   Ray Dalio’s
    *[Principles](http://www.bwater.com/Uploads/FileManager/Principles/Bridgewater-Associates-Ray-Dalio-Principles.pdf)*



Look at yourself objectively
============================

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)

* * * * *

*This post is part three of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

In the 1840s, hospitals were dangerous places. Mothers who went in to
give birth often didn’t make it out. For example, at Vienna General
Hospital’s First Obstetrical Clinic, as many as 10% of mothers died of
puerperal fever after giving birth. But there was some good news: at the
Second Clinic, the number was just 4%. Expectant mothers noticed this —
some would get down on their knees and beg to be admitted to the Second
Clinic. Others, hearing new patients were being admitted to the First
Clinic that day, decided they’d rather give birth in the streets.

Ignaz Semmelweis, an assistant at the First Clinic, couldn’t bear it. He
began desperately searching for some kind of explanation for the
difference. He tested many things without success. Then, in 1847,
Semmelweis’s friend Jakob Kolletschka was performing an autopsy when a
student accidentally poked him with a scalpel. It was a minor injury,
but Kolletschka got terribly sick and ultimately passed away, with
symptoms rather like the what the mothers had. Which got Semmelweis
wondering: was some “deathly material” on the corpses responsible for
the deaths?

To test this, he insisted the doctors begin washing their hands with
chlorinated lime (which he found best removed the stink of death) before
handling the pregnant women. The results were shocking. In April 1847,
the mortality rate was 18.3%. Semmelweis instituted handwashing in
mid-May and by June the mortality rate had crashed to 2.2%. The next
month it was even less and later that year it reached zero — for the
first time ever.

You’d think doctors would be thrilled by this incredible discovery.
Instead, Semmelweis was ridiculed and attacked. He was fired from the
hospital and forced out of Vienna. “In published medical works my
teachings are either ignored or attacked,” he complained. “The medical
faculty at Würzburg awarded a prize to a monograph written in 1859 in
which my teachings were rejected.” Even in his native Vienna, hundreds
of mothers continued to die every year.

Semmelweis turned to alcohol and his behavior became increasingly
erratic. In 1865, he was committed to a mental institution. There he was
beaten by the guards, placed in a straitjacket, and locked in a dark
cell. He died shortly thereafter, at the age of 47, from an infected
wound.^[1](#fn:fn1)^

* * * * *

Why did doctors so stubbornly reject Ignaz Semmelweis? Well, imagine
being told *you* were responsible for the deaths of thousands of your
patients. That you had been killing the people you were supposed to be
protecting. That you were so bad at your job that you were actually
worse than just giving birth in the street.

We all know people don’t like to hear bad news about themselves. Indeed,
we go out of our way to avoid it — and when we do confront it, we try to
downplay it or explain it away. Cognitive dissonance psychologists have
proven it in dozens of experiments: Force students through an
embarrassing initiation to take a class, and they’ll insist the class is
much more interesting. Make them do a favor for someone they hate, and
they start insisting they actually like them. Have them make a small
ethical compromises and they’ll feel comfortable making bigger and
bigger ones. Instead of just accepting we made a mistake, and shouldn’t
have compromised or done the favor or join the class, we start telling
ourselves that compromising isn’t so bad — and when the next compromise
comes along, we believe the lies we tell ourselves, and leap at making
another mistake. We hate hearing bad news about ourselves so much that
we’d rather *change our behavior* than just admit we screwed
up.^[2](#fn:mwm)^

It doesn’t help much when our friends point out what we did wrong. If
we’re so scared of hearing from ourselves that we made a mistake, just
imagine how much we hate hearing it from someone else. And our friends
know this: the answer to “Does this outfit make me look fat?” is not
supposed to be “yes.” We may joke about our friends’ foibles behind
their back, but we rarely do so to their face. Even at work, a lot of
effort goes into making sure employees are insulated from their
superior’s most negative assessments. This is what we’re taught: make
five compliments for every criticism, sandwich negative feedback with
positive feedback on each side, the most important thing is to keep up
someone’s self-esteem.

But, as Semmelweis showed, this is a dangerous habit. Sure, it’s awful
to hear you’re killing people—but it’s way worse to *keep on killing
people*! It may not be fun to get told you’re lazy, but it’s better to
hear it now than to find out when you’re fired. If you want to work on
getting better, you need to start by knowing where you are.

* * * * *

Semmelweis was defeated about as much as a man can be defeated. But
nothing the other doctors could do to him would change the facts.
Eventually scientists proved the germ theory of disease and Semmelweis
was vindicated. Today, he’s an international hero: universities and
hospitals are named after him, his house has been turned into a museum,
Austria even put his face on a €50 gold coin. Meanwhile, the doctors who
opposed him are now seen as close-minded killers.

Try as you might, you can’t beat reality. Semmelweis was right: those
doctors *were* killing people. Firing him, driving him out of the
country, writing long books disproving all his claims — none of it could
change that frightening fact. The doctors may have thought they were
winning the argument at the time, but they were big losers in the long
run. And so were all the families that lost a loved one because they
refused to admit their mistake.

But imagine if they had. When you’re being attacked, conceding you
screwed up seems like the worst thing you can do. If even you won’t
stand up for yourself, how can anyone else believe in you? Admitting
your mistakes seems like giving up; it just proves that your opponents
were right all along. But is it really so bad?

When Oprah started defending fabulist James Frey, she was savaged by the
press. So she invited her critics on the show and apologized, saying
“You were right, I was wrong.” It didn’t destroy her reputation; it
rescued it. When the space shuttle *Columbia* exploded, launch manager
Wayne Hale took full responsibility: “The bottom line is that I failed
to understand what I was being told…I am guilty of allowing Columbia to
crash.” He was promoted. When JFK admitted the responsibility for the
Bay of Pigs fiasco was “mine, and mine alone,” his poll numbers
soared.^[3](#fn:mwm2)^

Imagine the same thing in your own life. If your boss started taking
responsibility for your organization’s problems instead of blaming
others, wouldn’t you like him more? If your doctor told you honestly
that she had screwed up a procedure, instead of trying to cover up the
mistake, wouldn’t you prefer that? If a politician came clean that their
policy proposals had failed, wouldn’t you be more likely to trust him?

In moments of great emotional stress, we revert to our worst habits: we
dig in and fight harder. The real trick is not to get better at fighting
— it’s to get better at stopping ourselves: at taking a deep breath,
calming down, and letting our better natures take over from our worst
instincts.

* * * * *

Even if seeing ourselves objectively is the best option, all our natural
instincts all point the other direction. Not only do we try hard to
avoid bad news about ourselves, we tend to exaggerate the good news.
Imagine you and Jane are both up for a promotion. You want it bad, so
you stay late, you work weekends. Sure, some things still slip through
the cracks — but even those mistakes have really good reasons! Jane
never does anything like that.

But if she did — would you even know? We see the world from our own
perspective. When we have to cancel hanging out with friends to do extra
work, we always see that — and feel the sacrifice. But when Jane does
it, we see and feel nothing. You only get to see your own perspective.
And even our mistakes make sense from our perspective — we see all of
the context, everything that led up to it. It all makes sense because we
saw it happen. When we screw up, it’s for a reason. When other people
screw up, it’s because they’re screwups.

* * * * *

Looking at ourselves objectively isn’t easy. But it’s essential if we
ever want to get better. And if we don’t do it, we leave ourselves open
to con artists and ethical compromisers who prey on our desire to
believe we’re perfect. There’s no one solution, but here are some tricks
I use to get a more accurate sense of myself:

*Embrace your failings.* Be willing to believe the worst about yourself.
Remember: it’s much better to accept that you’re a selfish, racist moron
and try to improve, than to continue sleepwalking through life that way
as the only one who doesn’t know it.

*Studiously avoid euphemism.* People try and sugarcoat the tough facts
about themselves by putting them in the best light possible. They say
“Well, I was going to get to it, but then there was that big news story
today” and not “Yeah, I was procrastinating on it and started reading
the news instead.” Stating things plainly makes it easier to confront
the truth.

*Reverse your projections.* Every time you see yourself complaining
about other groups or other people, stop yourself and think: “is it
possible, is there any way, that someone out there might be making the
same complaints about me?”

*Look up, not down.* It’s always easy to make yourself look good by
finding people even worse than you. Yes, we agree, you’re not the worst
person in the world. That’s not the question. The question is whether
you can get better — and to do that you need to look at the people who
are even better than you.

*Criticize yourself.* The main reason people don’t tell you what they
really think of you is they’re afraid of your reaction. (If they’re
right to be afraid, then you need to start by working on that.) But
people will feel more comfortable telling you the truth if you start by
criticizing yourself, showing them that it’s OK.

*Find honest friends.* There are some people who are just congenitally
honest. For others, it’s possible to build a relationship of honesty
over time. Either way, it’s important to find friends who you can trust
to tell to tell you the harsh truths about yourself. *This is really
hard* — most people don’t like telling harsh truths. Some people have
had success providing an anonymous feedback form for people to submit
their candid reactions.

*Listen to the criticism.* Since it’s so rare to find friends who will
honestly criticize you, you need to listen extra-carefully when they do.
It’s tempting to check what they say against your other friends. For
example, if one friend says the short story you wrote isn’t very good,
you might show it to some other friends and ask them what they think.
Wow, they all think it’s great! Guess that one friend was just an
outlier. But the fact is that most of your friends are going to say it’s
great because they’re your friend; by just taking their word for it, you
end up ignoring the one person who’s actually being honest with you.

*Take the outside view.* As I said before, we’re always locked in our
own heads, where everything we do makes sense. So try seeing what you
look like from the outside for a bit, assuming you don’t know any of
those details. Sure, your big money-making plan sounds like a great idea
when you explain it, but if you throw that away, is there any external
evidence that it will work?

**Next in this series:** [Lean into the
pain](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dalio)

* * * * *

1.  “[Ignaz Semmelweis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ignaz_Semmelweis)”,
    *Wikipedia* ([visited
    2012-08-13](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ignaz_Semmelweis&oldid=501540461)). [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Carol Tavris and Elliot Aaronson, *[Mistakes Were Made (but not by
    me): Why We Justify Foolish Beliefs, Bad Decisions, and Hurtful
    Acts](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0156033909)*, (2007), ch.
    1. [↩](#fnref:mwm)

3.  *Mistakes Were Made*, ch. 8. A larger study of public companies also
    found that companies which admitted screwing up tended to have
    higher stock prices. Fiona Lee, Christopher Peterson, and Larissa Z.
    Tiedens, “[Mea Culpa: Predicting Stock Prices From Organizational
    Attributions](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167204266654),”
    *Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,* **30**: 12 (December
    2004), 1636–1649. [↩](#fnref:mwm2)




Take a step back
================

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/stepback)

* * * * *

*This post introduces a new series, [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

For most of my life, I saw my job as just making good choices. I was the
decider, tasked with making the best selection from the options life
presented. I could play with this friend or that one, go to this college
or that one, take this job offer or the other one.

Even my problems I dealt with this way. If someone was annoying me, I’d
choose to avoid them. If something was bugging me, I’d choose to stop
thinking about it. I mostly kept my eyes on what was in front of me.

But recently I’ve started appreciating the virtues of stepping back and
trying to see the bigger picture. Instead of just picking the best
option, I try to invent new ones. Instead of just avoiding the stuff
that bugs me, should I start making plans to fix them.

It’s given me a weird feeling. I feel more in control of my life, more
able to cope with my problems. I feel like I’m charting my own destiny,
instead of following some track. It’s hard to explain, but it’s a
feeling like I’m getting stronger — not physically, but psychologically.
It’s a good feeling. I feel like I’m growing as a person.

So I started wondering: *Is there more where that came from?* I realized
I’ve never stopped to ask whether I could get better at life. After all,
in my day job, I’m constantly looking for ways to learn and grow —
reading the latest books and articles about the field, talking to other
people with similar jobs and hearing what’s worked for them. Why aren’t
I doing the same thing for life?

It turns out to be surprisingly hard. Life comes with no instruction
manual and the advice parents give is all over the place. TV and the
newspapers don’t offer much more than narrow Quick Tips and I never saw
a course in this stuff at school. There are self-help books and
self-improvement courses, of course, but they seem overly practical:
they’re usually less about working through tough problems and more about
energizing you to Get Up And Go! And there’s philosophy about The Good
Life, but it seems to go too far in the other direction: there’s very
little in there for someone to practically apply.

The blogs are a weird mix. There are the blogs on “life hacks,” which
are full of gadgets and gizmos that seem to cause more problems than
they solve. There are the anti-procrastination blogs, where the author
has a constant stream of epiphanies that all seem to amount to “just put
away the distractions and get stuff done.” And there are the charlatans,
who tell you that all your wildest dreams can come true if you just
follow their patented advice.

So instead of an obvious place to go, I’ve just been finding little bits
and pieces in all sorts of strange places: psychology experiments,
business books, philosophy, self-help, math, and my friends. But since
there’s no community around it, it’s hard to discuss it with anyone
(trying to persuade other people to be interested in what you’re
interested in is a fool’s game).

So I figure I’ll just start writing about it here and see if anyone
cares. Maybe it’ll grow into something, but even if it doesn’t at least
I’ll clarify my thoughts and hopefully get a few good suggestions for
further reading.

I don’t have a name for what I’m talking about or even a good sense of
what it is. I’m hopeful that will become clearer with practice. But in
the meantime, what’s helped you get better at life?–at thinking,
deciding, working, thinking. Whether it’s a gadget or technique or book
or person, I’d love it if you [posted what you’ve found most helpful in
the comments](http://talk.aaronsw.com/take-a-step-back).

**Next in this series:** [Believe you can
change](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck)


Edmund Burke Explains *The Dark Knight Rises*
=============================================

August 19, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/burketdkr)

* * * * *

From Corey Robin’s fantastic book *[The Reactionary
Mind](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0199793743)*:

> Great power, [Burke] suggests in *The Sublime and the Beautiful*,
> should never aspire to be—and can never actually be—beautiful. What
> great power needs is sublimity. The sublime is the sensation we
> experience in the face of extreme pain, danger, or terror. It is
> something like awe but tinged with fear and dread. Burke calls it
> “delightful horror.” Great power should aspire to sublimity rather
> than beauty because sublimity produces “the strongest emotion which
> the mind is capable of feeling.” It is an arresting yet invigorating
> emotion, which has the simultaneous but contradictory effect of
> diminishing and magnifying us. We feel annihiliated by great power; at
> the same time, our sense of self “swell[s]” when “we are conversant
> with terrible objects.” Great power achieves sublimity when it is,
> among other things, obscure and mysterious, and when it is extreme.
> “In all things,” writes Burke, the sublime “abhors
> mediocrity.”^[1](#fn:fn18)^
>
> In the *Reflections*, Burke suggests that the problem in France is
> that the old regime is beautiful while the revolution is sublime. The
> landed interest, the cornerstone of the old regime, is “sluggish,
> inert, and timid.” It cannot defend itself “from the invasions of
> ability,” with ability standing in here for the new men of power that
> the revolution brings forth. Elsewhere in the *Reflections*, Burke
> says that the moneyed interest, which is allied with the revolution,
> is stronger than the aristocratic interest because it is “more ready
> for any adventure” and “more disposed to new enterprises of any kind.”
> The old regime, in other words, is beautiful, static, and weak; the
> revolution is ugly, dynamic, and strong. And in the horrors that the
> revolution perpetrates—the rabble rushing into the bedchamber of the
> queen, dragging her half-naked into the street, and marching her and
> her family to Paris—the revolution achieves a kind of sublimity: “We
> are alarmed into reflexion,” writes Burke of the revolutionaries’
> actions. “Our minds … are purified by terror and pity; our weak
> unthinking pride is humbled, under the dispensations of a mysterious
> wisdom.^[2](#fn:fn19)^
>
> Beyond these simple professions of envy or admiration, the
> conservative actually copies and learns from the revolution he
> opposes. “To destroy that enemy,” Burke wrote of the Jacobins, “by
> some means or other, the force opposed to it should be made to bear
> some analogy and resemblance to the force and spirit which that system
> exerts.”^[3](#fn:fn20)^

Is it not all here, right down to the moneyed interests allying with the
revolution and the revolution throwing the aristocrats from their
bedchambers?

* * * * *

1.  Burke, *Sublime and the Beautiful*, 86, 96, 121,
    165. [↩](#fnref:fn18)

2.  Burke, *Reflections*, 207, 243, 275. Also see Burke, *Regicide
    Peace*, 66, 70, 107, 157, 207, 222. [↩](#fnref:fn19)

3.  Burke, *Regicide Peace*, 184. [↩](#fnref:fn20)




What Happens in *Batman Begins*
===============================

August 22, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/batmanbegins)

* * * * *

*Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow — for both* Batman Begins *and* The
Dark Knight Rises.^[1](#fn:fn1)^

We begin in the 1980s, when the global forces of evil have decided to
institute a new economic policy on the world. Their nefarious plan
dramatically exacerbates inequality, making the rich filthy rich while
the poor suffer terrible levels of unemployment.

The difference is that in the Batman universe, Gotham’s leading
billionaire (Thomas Wayne) can’t stand the suffering and begins
investing in the city when the government won’t. He builds a giant
Keynesian supertrain in a desperate attempt to get the city back to
work. But, in an ironic twist, he ends up murdered by one of the
desperate poverty-stricken citizens he’s trying so hard to help.

The murder of the billionaire shocks the surviving billionaires, leading
them to reverse their neoliberal policies. Instead of getting tough on
crime, they decide to indulge criminals, with a deep willingness to
treat criminality as merely a mental health problem.

As the billionaires retreat from power, organized crime steps in, taking
their place in buying off judges and unions and cops. Instead of being
run by Wayne Enterprises, the city ends up being run by mob boss Carmine
Falcone.

But a few rogue elements in the police and DA’s office refuse to be
bought off. They free the man who murdered Thomas Wayne in exchange for
his testimony against Falcone. Bruce Wayne, the billionaire’s son, is so
haunted by his personal demons that he can’t stand this trade-off. When
his childhood-friend-turned-rogue-ADA points out the selfishness of his
position, he confronts Falcone. When Falcone explains that Bruce will
always live in fear of what he does not understand, Bruce sets off on a
quest to understand criminals.

His search concludes in a far eastern terrorist training camp, which
turns out to be backed by the same global forces of evil that invented
neoliberalism. It’s the year 2000 and they have a new plan: attacking
Gotham with the hope of inspiring enough fear that the city will destroy
itself.^[2](#fn:rg)^

Bruce, still haunted by the execution of his parents, refuses to become
an executioner himself and, instead of joining the plot, sets fire to
the camp before returning to clean up Gotham his own way. He begins by
putting together a case against Falcone and re-seizing control of Wayne
Enterprises by buying up its shares on the public market.

In doing so, he begins a reversal of history that eventually culminates
in [*The Dark Knight Rises*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr). His
attack on Falcone leads to a new era of tough-on-crime, which dethrones
the organized criminals and allows the wealthy to seize power again. The
wealthy quickly reinstitute neoliberalism and buy back Bruce’s shares on
the public market, putting Wayne Enterprises back in their hands. But
the global forces of evil step in once again to “restore balance” by
letting Bane to release the organized criminals.^[3](#fn:gfe)^ Bruce
Wayne goes back to being an innocent child of privilege and the trilogy
ends exactly where it started.^[4](#fn:rob)^

* * * * *

1.  *Batman Begins* is very clearly the mirror image of [*The Dark
    Knight Rises*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr) (some scenes are
    almost word-for-word the same), so understanding one can help us
    understand the other. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Yes, in this trilogy 9/11 really was an inside job, from the same
    folks who brought you Reaganomics. [↩](#fnref:rg)

3.  Democrats, Republicans, organized crime, or billionaire financiers —
    whoever tries to seize power, the global forces of evil continue to
    hold the reins from behind-the-scenes, making sure nobody changes
    the system too much. [↩](#fnref:gfe)

4.  Exactly, right down to how Robin (who see as a small boy in the
    first film, the same way we see Bruce in flashbacks) ends the film
    frustrated by the system (the same way Bruce was frustrated by
    Rachel) and is about to head out in a quest of his own, following
    the same path Bruce Wayne took. Thus the cycle
    continues. [↩](#fnref:rob)




What are the optimal biases to overcome?
========================================

August 29, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/optimalbias)

* * * * *

*This is a bonus post for my series [Raw
Nerve](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve). It originally appeared
in [somewhat different
form](http://lesswrong.com/lw/dya/what_are_the_optimal_biases_to_overcome/)
on Less Wrong.*

I’ve noticed that some people have complimented my series [Raw
Nerve](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve) by saying it’s a great
explanation of cognitive biases. Which always amuses me, since the
series grew out of frustrations I had with the usual way that term gets
used. There’s a group of people (call them the cognitive bias community)
who say the way to be more rational — to get better at making decisions
that get you what you want — is to work at overcoming your biases. But
if you’re overcoming biases, surely there are some lessons that will
help you more than others.

You might start with the most famous ones, which tend to be the ones
popularized by Kahneman and Tversky. But K&T were academics. They
weren’t trying to help people be more rational, they were trying to
prove to other academics that people were irrational. The result is that
they focused not on the most important biases, but the ones that were
easiest to prove.

Take their famous anchoring experiment, in which they showed the spin of
a roulette wheel affected people’s estimates about African countries.
The idea wasn’t that roulette wheels causing biased estimates was a huge
social problem; it was that no academic could possibly argue that this
behavior was somehow rational. They thereby scored a decisive blow for
psychology against economists claiming we’re just rational maximizers.

Most academic work on irrationality has followed in K&T’s footsteps.
And, in turn, much of the stuff done by the wider cognitive bias
community has followed in the footsteps of this academic work. So it’s
not hard to believe that cognitive bias types are good at avoiding these
biases and thus do well on the psychology tests for them. (Indeed, many
of the questions on these tests for rationality come straight from K&T
experiments!)

But if you look at the average person and ask why they aren’t getting
what they want, very rarely do you conclude their biggest problem is
that they’re suffering from anchoring, framing effects, the planning
fallacy, commitment bias, or any of the other stuff in these tests.
Usually their biggest problems are far more quotidian and
commonsensical, like procrastination and fear.

One of the things that struck me was watching Eliezer Yudkowsky, one of
the most impressive writers on the topic of cognitive biases, try to
start a new nonprofit. For years, the organization he founded struggled
until recently, when Luke Muehlhauser was named executive director.
Eliezer readily agrees that Luke has done more to achieve Eliezer’s own
goals for the organization than Eliezer ever did.

But why? Why is Luke so much better at getting what Eliezer wants than
Eliezer is? It’s surely not because Luke is so much better at avoiding
the standard cognitive biases! Luke often talks about how he’s
constantly learning new rationality techniques from Eliezer.

No, it’s because Luke did what seems like common sense: he bought a copy
of *Nonprofits for Dummies* and did what it recommends. As Luke himself
[says](http://lesswrong.com/lw/cbs/thoughts_on_the_singularity_institute_si/6klg?context=1#6l4h),
it wasn’t lack of intelligence or resources or willpower that kept
Eliezer from doing these things, “it was a gap in general rationality.”

So if you’re interested in closing the gap, it seems like the skills to
prioritize aren’t things like commitment effect and the sunk cost
fallacy, but stuff like “figure out what your goals really are”, “look
at your situation objectively and list the biggest problems”, “when
you’re trying something new and risky, read the For Dummies book about
it first”, etc. That’s the stuff I’m interested in writing about.


Lean into the pain
==================

September 1, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dalio)

* * * * *

*This post is part four of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

When you first begin to exercise, it’s somewhat painful. Not wildly
painful, like touching a hot stove, but enough that if your only goal
was to avoid pain, you certainly would stop doing it. But if you keep
exercising… well, it just keeps getting more painful. When you’re done,
if you’ve really pushed yourself, you often feel exhausted and sore. And
the next morning it’s even worse.

If that was all that happened, you’d probably never do it. It’s not that
much fun being sore. Yet we do it anyway — because we know that, in the
long run, the pain will make us stronger. Next time we’ll be able to run
harder and lift more before the pain starts.

And knowing this makes all the difference. Indeed, we come to see the
pain as a sort of pleasure — it feels good to really push yourself, to
fight through the pain and make yourself stronger. Feel the burn! It’s
fun to wake up sore the next morning, because you know that’s just a
sign that you’re getting stronger.

Few people realize it, but psychological pain works the same way. Most
people treat psychological pain like the hot stove — if starting to
think about something scares them or stresses them out, they quickly
stop thinking about it and change the subject.

The problem is that the topics that are most painful also tend to be the
topics that are most important for us: they’re the projects we most want
to do, the relationships we care most about, the decisions that have the
biggest consequences for our future, the most dangerous risks that we
run. We’re scared of them because we know the stakes are so high. But if
we never think about them, then we can never do anything about them.

Ray Dalio writes:

> It is a fundamental law of nature that to evolve one has to push one’s
> limits, which is painful, in order to gain strength—whether it’s in
> the form of lifting weights, facing problems head-on, or in any other
> way. Nature gave us pain as a messaging device to tell us that we are
> approaching, or that we have exceeded, our limits in some way. At the
> same time, nature made the process of getting stronger require us to
> push our limits. Gaining strength is the adaptation process of the
> body and the mind to encountering one’s limits, which is painful. In
> other words, both pain and strength typically result from encountering
> one’s barriers. When we encounter pain, we are at an important
> juncture in our decision-making process.^[1](#fn:d)^

Yes it’s painful, but the trick is to make that mental shift. To realize
that the pain isn’t something awful to be postponed and avoided, but a
signal that you’re getting stronger — something to savor and enjoy. It’s
what makes you better.

Pretty soon, when you start noticing something that causes you psychic
pain, you’ll get excited about it, not afraid. *Ooh, another chance to
get stronger.* You’ll seek out things you’re scared of and intentionally
confront them, because it’s an easy way to get the great rewards of
self-improvement. Dalio suggests thinking of each one as a puzzle,
inside of which is embedded a beautiful gem. If you fight through the
pain to solve the puzzle, you unlock it and get to keep the gem.

The trick is: when you start feeling that psychological pain coming on,
don’t draw back from it and cower — lean into it. Lean into the pain.

* * * * *

In agile software development, there’s a phrase: If it hurts, do it more
often.^[2](#fn:f)^

For example, imagine Jane and Joan are working on a software project
together. They both have a copy of the code; Jane is making the error
messages friendlier while Joan is adding a new feature. They both work
on their task for days and days until it’s finally done. Now they face a
problem: they need to *merge* their different changes back together.

Maybe you’ve had this problem, either with code or with text documents:
you send a draft of a report to two friends, both suggest different
changes, and you have to merge all their changes back into the original
document. It’s incredibly annoying — and doing it with software is way
worse. So people put it off. Jane thinks “you know, let me just make the
thank you messages a little nicer before we merge” and Joan thinks “you
know, let me add just one more feature before we merge”.

They keep putting the merge off, and every time they do the task gets
bigger and more painful. But they have to do it eventually. By then, the
merge is so big that it takes days of painstaking work just to piece
together the already-written code. It’s an arduous, painful process —
which makes Joan and Jane just want to put it off even longer next time.

The agile approach, however, is to do the opposite: merging hurts, so
we’ll do it more often. Instead of merging every couple weeks, or every
couple months, we’ll merge every single day, or every couple hours. Even
if Jane and Joan aren’t even close to finished with their work, they’ll
check in what they have so far (maybe with some special code
deactivating it until it’s finished) so they don’t end up in merge hell
later on. These very small merges tend not to be painful at all, they’re
so easy that you hardly even notice.

The same principle shows up all across software development: from
testing to releasing, your natural inclination is to put off painful
things, when doing them more often actually is much easier.

And I don’t think it’s limited to software. I think the same principle
would work even if, for some odd reason, you were required to touch a
hot stove for an hour. Procrastinating and putting it off until you had
no choice but to hold your hand to the stove for a full hour would end
up being very painful. But if you did it in small frequent bits, just
quick taps of the stove with your finger that eventually added up to an
hour, it wouldn’t be so bad at all. Again, the trick is not to run from
the pain.

* * * * *

Of all the self-improvement tricks I’ve learned, this one was by far the
most surprising — and by far the most impactful. I spent most of my life
hemmed in by my talents. I knew I had strengths and weaknesses and it
just seemed obvious I should find jobs that fit my strengths. It seemed
crazy to take a job that probed my weaknesses.

Sure, there were somethings, over there, that I wished I was better at,
but they seemed so far away. Meanwhile, there were lots of things over
here that I was good at. Why not just keep doing them? Sure, I realized
intellectually that [I could get
better](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck) at the other stuff, but it
hardly seemed worth the pain of trying.

I’d learned [not to shrink from hard
truths](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis), so I’d literally have
this conversation with myself: “Yes, I know: if I got better at selling
things to people [or whatever it was], I’d be much better off. But look
at how painful I find selling: just thinking about it makes me want to
run and hide! Sure, it’d be great if I could do it, but is it really
worth all that pain?”

Now I realize this is a bogus argument: it’s not that the pain is so bad
that it makes me flee, it’s that the importance of the topic triggers a
fight-or-flight reaction deep in my reptile brain. If instead of
thinking of it as a scary subject to avoid, I think of it as an exciting
opportunity to get better, then it’s no longer a cost-benefit tradeoff
at all: both sides are a benefit — I get the benefits of being good at
selling and the fun of getting better at something.

Do this enough times and your whole outlook on life begins to change.
It’s no longer a scary world, hemming you in, but an exciting one full
of exciting adventures to pursue.^[3](#fn:s)^

Tackling something big like this is terrifying; it’s far too much to
start with. It’s always better to start small. What’s something you’ve
been avoiding thinking about? It can be anything — a relationship
difficulty, a problem at work, something on your todo list you’ve been
avoiding. Call it to mind — despite the pain it brings — and just sort
of let it sit there. Acknowledge that thinking about it is painful and
feel good about yourself for being able to do it anyway. Feel it
becoming less painful as you force yourself to keep thinking about it.
See, you’re getting stronger!

OK, take a break. But when you’re ready, come back to it, and start
thinking of concrete things you can do about it. See how it’s not as
scary as you thought? See how good it feels to actually do something
about it?

Next time you start feeling that feeling, that sense of pain from deep
in your head that tells you to avoid a subject — ignore it. Lean into
the pain instead. You’ll be glad you did.

**Next in this series:** [Confront
reality](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/anders)

* * * * *

1.  Ray Dalio,
    *[Principles](http://www.bwater.com/Uploads/FileManager/Principles/Bridgewater-Associates-Ray-Dalio-Principles.pdf)*
    (2001), part 2 ([visited
    2012-09-01](http://www.webcitation.org/6ALtkRMHB)). This whole
    section was inspired by his argument. [↩](#fnref:d)

2.  I first heard this phrase at a ThoughtWorks training. See also
    Martin Fowler,
    “[FrequencyReducesDifficulty](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/FrequencyReducesDifficulty.html),”
    *Bliki* (28 July 2011). [↩](#fnref:f)

3.  See, for example, Derek Sivers, “[Push, push, push. Expanding your
    comfort zone](http://sivers.org/comfort),” *sivers.org* (13 August
    2012). [↩](#fnref:s)




Confront reality
================

September 9, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/anders)

* * * * *

*This post is part five of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

We are all capable of believing things which we know to be untrue, and
then, when we are finally proved wrong, impudently twisting the facts so
as to show that we were right. Intellectually, it is possible to carry
on this process for an indefinite time: the only check on it is that
sooner or later a false belief bumps up against solid reality, usually
on a battlefield.

—George Orwell, “[In Front of Your
Nose](http://orwell.ru/library/articles/nose/english/e_nose)”

If you want to understand experts, you need to start by finding them. So
the psychologists who wanted to understand “expert performance” began by
testing alleged experts, to see how good they really were.

In some fields it was easy: in chess, for example, great players can
reliably beat amateurs. But in other fields, it was much, much harder.

Take punditry. In his giant 20-year study of expert forecasting, Philip
Tetlock found that someone who merely predicted “everything will stay
the same” would be right more often than most professional
pundits.^[1](#fn:tet)^ Or take therapy. Numerous studies have found an
hour with a random stranger is just as good as an hour with a
professional therapist.^[2](#fn:dawes)^ In one study, for example,
sessions with untrained university professors helped neurotic college
students just as much as sessions with professional
therapists.^[3](#fn:strupp)^ (This isn’t to say that therapy isn’t
helpful — the same studies suggest it is — it’s just that what’s helpful
is talking over your problems for an hour, not anything about the
therapist.)

As you might expect, pundits and therapists aren’t fans of these
studies. The pundits try to weasel out of them. As Tetlock writes; “The
trick is to attach so many qualifiers to your vague predictions that you
will be well positioned to explain pretty much whatever happens. China
will fissure into regional fiefdoms, but only if the Chinese leadership
fails to manage certain trade-offs deftly, and only if global economic
growth stalls for a protracted period, and only if…”^[4](#fn:t2)^ The
therapists like to point to all the troubled people they’ve helped with
their sophisticated techniques (avoiding the question of whether someone
unsophisticated could have helped even more). What neither group can do
is point to clear evidence that what they do works.

Compare them to the chess grandmaster. If you try to tell the chess
grandmaster that he’s no better than a random college professor, he can
easily play a professor and prove you wrong. Every time he plays, he’s
confronted with inarguable evidence of success or failure. But
therapists can often feel like they’re helping — they just led their
client to a breakthrough about their childhood — when they’re actually
not making any difference.

Synthesizing hundreds of these studies, K. Anders Ericsson concluded
that what distinguishes experts from non-experts is engaging in what he
calls *deliberate practice*.^[5](#fn:anders)^ Mere practice isn’t enough
— you can sit and make predictions all day without getting any better at
it — it needs to be a kind of practice where you receive “immediate
informative feedback and knowledge of results.”^[6](#fn:a2)^

In chess, for example, you pretty quickly discover whether you made a
smart move or a disastrous error, and it’s even more obvious in other
sports (when practicing free-throws, it’s pretty obvious if the ball
misses the net). As a result, chess players can try different tactics
and learn which ones work and which don’t. Our pundit is not so lucky.
Predicting a wave of revolutions in the next twenty years can feel very
exciting at the time, but it will be twenty years before you learn
whether it was a good idea or not. It’s hard to get much deliberate
practice on that kind of time frame.

* * * * *

I’ve noticed very ambitious people often fall into this sort of trap.
Any old slob can predict what will happen tomorrow, they think, but I
want to be truly great, so I will pick a much harder challenge: I will
predict what will happen *in a hundred years*. It comes in lots of
forms: instead of building another silly site like Instagram, I will
build an *artificial intelligence*; instead of just doing another boring
experiment, I will write *a grand work of social theory*.

But being great isn’t as easy as just picking a hard goal — in fact,
picking a really hard goal avoids reality almost as much as picking a
really easy one. If you pick an easy goal, you know you’ll always
succeed (because it’s so easy); if you pick a really hard one, you know
you’ll never fail (because it will always be too early to tell).
Artificial intelligence is a truly big problem — how can you possibly
expect us to succeed in just a decade? But we’re making great progress,
we swear.

The trick is to set yourself lots of small challenges along the way. If
your startup is eventually going to make a million dollars, can it start
by making ten? If your book is going to eventually persuade the world,
can you start by persuading your friends? Instead of pushing all your
tests for success way off to the indefinite future, see if you can pass
a very small one right now.

And it’s important that you test for the right thing. If you’re writing
a program that’s supposed to make people’s lives easier, what’s
important is not whether they like your mockups in focus groups; it’s
whether you can make a prototype that actually improves their lives.

* * * * *

One of the biggest problems in writing self-help books is getting people
to actually take your advice. It’s not easy to tell a compelling story
that changes the way people view their problems, but it turns out to be
a lot easier than writing something that will actually persuade someone
to get up off the couch and change the way they live their life. There
are some things writing is really good at, but forcing people to get up
and do something isn’t one of them.

The irony, of course, is that the books are totally useless unless you
take their advice. If you just keep reading them, thinking “that’s so
insightful! that changes everything,” but never actually doing anything
different, then pretty quickly the feeling will wear off and you’ll
start searching for another book to fill the void. Chris Macleod calls
this “epiphany addiction”: “Each time they feel like they’ve stumbled on
some life changing discovery, feel energized for a bit without going on
to achieve any real world changes, and then return to their default of
feeling lonely and unsatisfied with their life. They always end up back
at the drawing board of trying to think their way out of their problem,
and it’s not long before they come up with the latest pseudo earth
shattering insight.”^[7](#fn:ss)^

Don’t let that happen to you. Go out and test yourself today: pick a
task just hard enough that you *might* fail, and try to succeed at it.
Reality is painful — it’s so much easier to keep doing stuff you know
you’re good at or else to pick something so hard there’s no point at
which it’s obvious you’re failing — but it’s impossible to get better
without confronting it.

**Next in this series:** [Cherish
mistakes](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/geremiah)

* * * * *

1.  Philip Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can
    We Know?* (2006). I don’t have my copy handy, so I checked this
    description against Philip Tetlock, “[Reading Tarot on K
    Street](http://nationalinterest.org/bookreview/reading-tarot-on-k-street-3220),”
    *The National Interest* (September/October 2009),
    57–67. [↩](#fnref:tet)

2.  Robyn M. Dawes, *House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built
    on Myth* (1996). [↩](#fnref:dawes)

3.  Hans H. Strupp and Suzanne W. Hadley, “[Specific vs Nonspecific
    Factors in Psychotherapy: A Controlled Study of
    Outcome](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1979.01780100095009),”
    *Archives of General Psychology* **36**:10 (1979),
    1125–1136. [↩](#fnref:strupp)

4.  Tetlock, “Reading Tarot,” 67. [↩](#fnref:t2)

5.  K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Th. Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Römer, “[The
    Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert
    Performance](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363),”
    *Psychological Review*, **100**:3 (July 1993),
    363–406. [↩](#fnref:anders)

6.  Ericsson, “Role,” 367. [↩](#fnref:a2)

7.  Chris Macleod, “[‘Epiphany
    Addiction’](http://www.succeedsocially.com/epiphany),” *Succeed
    Socially* ([visited
    2012-09-09](http://www.webcitation.org/6AYB8AIbz)). [↩](#fnref:ss)




Cherish mistakes
================

September 17, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/geremiah)

* * * * *

*This post is part six of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

This is a tale of two nonprofits.

At one, they hate making mistakes. How else could it be? “We’re not ever
going to enjoy screwing up,” they told me. But this attitude has a lot
of consequences. Everything they do has to go through several layers of
approval to make sure it’s not a mistake. And when someone does screw
up, they try to hide it.

It’s only natural — you know you’re going to get in trouble for screwing
up, so you try to fix it before anyone notices. And if you can’t do,
then your boss or your boss’s boss tries. And if no one in the
organization can fix it, and it goes all the way to the executive
director, then he tries to figure out a way to keep it from the press or
spin it appropriately, so the world never finds out they made a mistake.

At the other nonprofit, they have a very different attitude. You notice
it the first time you visit their website. Right in their navigation
bar, at the top of every page, is a link labeled “Mistakes.” Click it
and you’ll find a list of all the things they screwed up, starting with
the most horribly embarrassing one (they once promoted their group under
false names).

And it goes on to discuss mistakes big and small, core and peripheral.
They previously used flaky phones that would cut out during a call,
annoying people. They were insufficiently skeptical in some of the most
important claims they made. At times, their admissions have the tone of
a chastised teenager forced to write an apology, but together they
provide a remarkable record of all the mistakes, both crucial and
mundane, you might reasonably make when starting something new.

It’s not that this group likes making mistakes — you can feel the
annoyance and embarrassment seeping through the page — but they don’t
shirk from them either. They identify their mistake, admit them
publicly, and devise steps to avoid them next time. They use it as an
opportunity to get better.

* * * * *

I [wrote before](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck) about Carol
Dweck’s studies of successful and unsuccessful kids, but there’s one bit
that really jumped out at me. Given a really tough puzzle to solve, one
growth mindset kid just smiles and says “Mistakes are our
friend.”^[1](#fn:d2)^

*Mistakes are our friend.* They can be an exasperating friend sometimes,
the kind whose antics embarrass and annoy, but their heart is in the
right place: they want to help. It’s a bad idea to ignore our friends.

That’s a hard attitude to take toward mistakes — they’re so
embarrassing, our natural instinct is to want to hide them and cover
them up. But that’s the wrong way to think about them. They’re actually
giving us a gift, because they’re pointing the way toward getting
better.

If we try to ignore them, they’ll keep nagging at us. We’ll run into
them again and again in different guises. You’ll say “Don’t be silly,
that wasn’t a mistake — I meant to do that.” And then you’ll eagerly do
the same thing next time ([cognitive dissonance
again](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)). Or else you’ll say
“Yes, yes, of course that was a mistake — it won’t happen again.” But as
you hurry to move on, you don’t change anything, and so it does happen
again.

The trick is to confront the mistake, fess up to what went wrong, and
think about what you can change to keep it from happening again. Usually
just promising not to do it again is not enough: you need to dig into
the root causes and address those.

Sakichi Toyoda, the founder of the Toyota car company, developed a
technique called “Five Why’s” for handling this. For example, sometimes
a car would come off the Toyota production line and not start. Why?
Well, imagine it was because the alternator belt had come loose. Most
car companies would stop here and just fix the alternator belt. But
Toyoda understood that was dodging the mistake — it would just lead it
to come back again and again. So he insisted they keep asking “Why?”.

Why was the alternator belt loose? Because it hadn’t been put on
correctly. Why? Because the person putting it on didn’t double-check to
see if it had fit in correctly. Why? Because he was in too much of a
hurry. Why? Because he had to walk all the way to the other side of the
line to get the belts and by the time he got back he didn’t have enough
time to double-check.

Aha! There, on the fifth why, we find the real cause of the mistake. And
the solution is easy: move the box of alternator belts closer. But if
we’d stopped at any earlier point (say, by just yelling at the
alternator belt guy to always remember to double-check), we wouldn’t
have actually fixed the problem. The same mistake would have happened
again and again. Only by digging all the way to the root cause did we
realize we needed to move the box of belts. The mistake pointed the way
to the solution.

* * * * *

The last time I wrote about two nonprofits, someone commented to say
they were “outright nauseated” by my post. “[T]he website is not the
place to signal humility and argue against your own conclusions. All
that would demonstrate is naivety and incompetence,” they insisted. And
maybe they’re right: maybe having a mistakes page at the top of your
website goes much too far.

I’ve [written before](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis) why I
disagree, but even if they’re right that you shouldn’t tell the world
about your mistakes, you need to at least tell yourself. It’s much too
easy to conveniently forget about all the stuff you screwed up. And so
even though it happens again and again, you never notice the pattern.

By forcing yourself to write it down, to keep a log of the problems
you’ve run into, you begin to see patterns. You start seeing the things
you get better at and the things you keep flubbing. And then you know
what to work on for next time.

**Next in this series:** [Fix the machine, not the
person](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/nummi)

* * * * *

1.  Carol Dweck, *Self-Theories: Their Role in Motivation, Personality,
    and Development* (2000), 10. [↩](#fnref:d2)




Fix the machine, not the person
===============================

September 25, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nummi)

* * * * *

*This post is part seven of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

The General Motors plant in Fremont was a disaster. “Everything was a
fight,” the head of the union admits. “They spent more time on
grievances and on things like that than they did on producing cars. They
had strikes all the time. It was just chaos constantly. … It was
considered the worst workforce in the automobile industry in the United
States.”

“One of the expressions was, you can buy anything you want in the GM
plant in Fremont,” adds Jeffrey Liker, a professor who studied the
plant. “If you want sex, if you want drugs, if you want alcohol, it’s
there. During breaks, during lunch time, if you want to gamble
illegally—any illegal activity was available for the asking within that
plant.” Absenteeism was so bad that some mornings they didn’t have
enough employees to start the assembly line; they had to go across the
street and drag people out of the bar.

When management tried to punish workers, workers tried to punish them
right back: scratching cars, loosening parts in hard-to-reach places,
filing union grievances, sometimes even building cars unsafely. It was
war.

In 1982, GM finally closed the plant. But the very next year, when
Toyota was planning to start its first plant in the US, it decided to
partner with GM to reopen it, hiring back the same old disastrous
workers into the very same jobs. And so began the most fascinating
experiment in management history.

Toyota flew this rowdy crew to Japan, to see an entirely different way
of working: The Toyota Way. At Toyota, labor and management considered
themselves on the same team; when workers got stuck, managers didn’t
yell at them, but asked how they could help and solicited suggestions.
It was a revelation. “You had union workers—grizzled old folks that had
worked on the plant floor for 30 years, and they were hugging their
Japanese counterparts, just absolutely in tears,” recalls their Toyota
trainer. “And it might sound flowery to say 25 years later, but they had
had such a powerful emotional experience of learning a new way of
working, a way that people could actually work together
collaboratively—as a team.”

Three months after they got back to the US and reopened the plant,
everything had changed. Grievances and absenteeism fell away and workers
started saying they actually enjoyed coming to work. The Fremont
factory, once one of the worst in the US, had skyrocketed to become the
best. The cars they made got near-perfect quality ratings. And the cost
to make them had plummeted. It wasn’t the workers who were the problem;
it was the system.^[1](#fn:tal)^

* * * * *

An organization is not just a pile of people, it’s also a set of
structures. It’s almost like a machine made of men and women. Think of
an assembly line. If you just took a bunch of people and threw them in a
warehouse with a bunch of car parts and a manual, it’d probably be a
disaster. Instead, a careful structure has been built: car parts roll
down on a conveyor belt, each worker does one step of the process,
everything is carefully designed and routinized. Order out of chaos.

And when the system isn’t working, it doesn’t make sense to just yell at
the people in it — any more than you’d try to fix a machine by yelling
at the gears. True, sometimes you have the wrong gears and need to
replace them, but more often you’re just using them in the wrong way.
When there’s a problem, you shouldn’t get angry with the gears — you
should fix the machine.

If you have goals in life, you’re probably going to need some sort of
organization. Even if it’s an organization of just you, it’s still
helpful to think of it as a kind of machine. You don’t need to do every
part of the process yourself — you just need to set up the machine so
that the right outcomes happen.

For example, let’s say you want to build a treehouse in the backyard.
You’re great at sawing and hammering, but architecture is not your
forte. You build and build, but the treehouses keep falling down. Sure,
you can try to get better at architecture, develop a better design, but
you can also step back, look at the machine as a whole, and decide to
fire yourself as the architect. Instead, you find a friend who loves
that sort of thing to design the treehouse for you and you stick to
actually building it. After all, your goal was to build a treehouse
whose design you like — does it really matter whether you’re the one who
actually designed it?^[2](#fn:dalio)^

Or let’s say you really want to get in shape, but never remember to
exercise. You can keep beating yourself up for your forgetfulness, or
you can put a system in place. Maybe you have your roommate check to see
that you exercise before you leave your house in the morning or you set
a regular time to consistently go to the gym together. Life isn’t a high
school exam; you don’t have to solve your problems on your own.

* * * * *

In 1967, Edward Jones and Victor Harris gathered a group of college
students and asked them to judge another student’s exam (the student was
a fictional character, but let’s call him Jim). The exam always had one
question, asking Jim to write an essay on Fidel Castro “as if [he] were
giving the opening statement in a debate.” But what sort of essay Jim
was supposed to write varied: some of them required Jim to write a
*defense* of Castro, others required Jim to write a *critique* of
Castro, the rest left the choice up to Jim. The kids in the experiment
were asked to read Jim’s essay and then were asked whether they thought
Jim himself was pro- or anti-Castro.

Jones and Harris weren’t expecting any shocking results here; their goal
was just to show the obvious: that people would conclude Jim was
pro-Castro when he voluntarily chose write to a pro-Castro essay, but
not when he was forced to by the teacher. But what they found surprised
them: even when the students could easily see the question *required*
Jim to write a pro-Castro essay, they still rated Jim as significantly
more pro-Castro. It seemed hard to believe. “Perhaps some of the
subjects were inattentive and did not clearly understand the context,”
they suspected.

So they tried again. This time they explained the essay was written for
a debate tournament, where the student had been randomly assigned to
either the for or against side of the debate. They wrote it in big
letters on the blackboard, just to make this perfectly clear. But again
they got the same results — even more clearly this time. They still
couldn’t believe it. Maybe, they figured, students thought Jim’s
arguments were so compelling he must really believe them to be able to
come up with them.

So they tried a third time — this time recording Jim on tape along with
the experimenter *giving him the arguments* to use. Surely no one would
think Jim came up with them on his own now. Again, the same striking
results: students were persuaded Jim believed the arguments he said,
even when they knew he had no choice in making them.^[3](#fn:jh)^

This was an extreme case, but we make the same mistake all the time. We
see a sloppily-parked car and we think “what a terrible driver,” not “he
must have been in a real hurry.” Someone keeps bumping into you at a
concert and you think “what a jerk,” not “poor guy, people must keep
bumping into him.” A policeman beats up a protestor and we think “what
an awful person,” not “what terrible training.” The mistake is so common
that in 1977 Lee Ross decided to name it the “fundamental attribution
error”: we attribute people’s behavior to their personality, not their
situation.^[4](#fn:lr)^

* * * * *

Our natural reaction when someone screws up is to get mad at them. This
is what happened at the old GM plant: workers would make a mistake and
management would yell and scream. If asked to explain the yelling,
they’d probably say that since people don’t like getting yelled at, it’d
teach them be more careful next time.

But this explanation doesn’t really add up. Do you think the workers
liked screwing up? Do you think they enjoyed making crappy cars? Well,
we don’t have to speculate: we know the very same workers, when given
the chance to do good work, took pride in it and started actually
enjoying their jobs.

They’re just like you, when you’re trying to exercise but failing. Would
it have helped to have your friend just yell and scream at you for being
such a lazy loser? Probably not — it probably would have just made you
feel worse. What worked wasn’t yelling, but changing the system around
you so that it was easier to do what you already wanted to do.

The same is true for other people. Chances are, they don’t *want* to
annoy you, they don’t like screwing up. So what’s going to work isn’t
yelling at them, but figuring out how to change the situation. Sometimes
that means changing how you behave. Sometimes that means bringing
another person into the mix. And sometimes it just means simple stuff,
like changing the way things are laid out or putting up reminders.

At the old GM plant, in Fremont, workers were constantly screwing things
up: “cars with engines put in backwards, cars without steering wheels or
brakes. Some were so messed up they wouldn’t start, and had to be towed
off the line.” Management would yell at the workers, but what could you
do? Things were moving so fast. “A car a minute don’t seem like it’s
moving that fast,” noted one worker, “but when you don’t get it, you’re
in the hole. There’s nobody to pull you out at General Motors, so you’re
going to let something go.”

At the Toyota plant, they didn’t just let things go. There was a red
cord running above the assembly line, known as an andon cord, and if you
ever found yourself in the hole, all you had to do was pull it, and the
whole line would stop. Management would come over and ask you how they
could help, if there was a way they could fix the problem. And they’d
actually listen — and do it!

You saw the results all over the factory: mats and cushions for the
workers to kneel on; hanging shelves traveling along with the cars,
carrying parts; special tools invented specifically to solve problems
the workers had identified. Those little things added up to make a big
difference.

When you’re upset with someone, all you want to do is change the way
they’re acting. But you can’t control what’s inside a person’s head.
Yelling at them isn’t going to make them come around, it’s just going to
make them more defiant, like the GM workers who keyed the cars they
made.

No, you can’t force other people to change. You can, however, change
just about everything else. And usually, that’s enough.

Email me about new posts: Go\
(I won’t use your email for anything else, promise.)

Or just [follow me on Twitter
here](https://twitter.com/intent/follow?screen_name=aaronsw).

* * * * *

1.  This story has been told several places, but the quotes here are
    from Frank Langfitt with Brian Reed,
    “[NUMMI](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/403/nummi),”
    *This American Life* 403 (26 March 2010; [visited
    2012-09-23](http://www.webcitation.org/6AtWqEsXM)). Quotes are taken
    from [the show’s
    transcript](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/403/transcript)
    which sometimes differ slightly from the aired
    version. [↩](#fnref:tal)

2.  Some of the concepts and terms here were inspired by Ray Dalio,
    *[Principles](http://www.bwater.com/Uploads/FileManager/Principles/Bridgewater-Associates-Ray-Dalio-Principles.pdf)*
    (2001), part 2 ([visited
    2012-09-01](http://www.webcitation.org/6ALtkRMHB)). [↩](#fnref:dalio)

3.  Edward E. Jones and Victor A. Harris, “[The Attribution of
    Attitudes](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0022-1031(67)90034-0),”
    *Journal of Experimental Social Psychology* **3**:1 (January 1967),
    1–24. [↩](#fnref:jh)

4.  Lee Ross, “The Intuitive Psychologist and His Shortcomings:
    Distortions in the Attribution Process,” *Advances in Experimental
    Social Psychology* **10** (1977), 173–220. [↩](#fnref:lr)




How Looper Works
================

October 8, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/looperexplained)

* * * * *

First off, go see *Looper*. One of the best movies I’ve seen. Spoilers
follow.

OK, let’s start by explaining how a looper’s career is supposed to look.
You get hired as a looper, spend your time sitting in a corn field
shooting people, eventually shoot yourself and get a big payday, live
off of it for thirty more years, then get kidnapped and sent back in
time and shot by yourself. Notice that this is a stable timeloop: young
you grows old, goes back in time, gets shot by young you, who grows old,
goes back in time, gets shot by young you, who grows old … etc.

But time travel doesn’t eliminate free will. We see this with the case
of Seth (Paul Dano / Frank Brennan). Instead of shooting Old Seth, Young
Seth decides to let him escape. This too is a stable timeloop: young
Seth grows old, goes back in time, escapes, lives in hiding while young
Seth grows old, goes back in time, escapes, lives in hiding while … .

But other characters have free will too: young Joe (Joseph
Gordon-Levitt) decides to give young Seth up. The gang cuts off one of
young Seth’s fingers, pushing him into a new timeloop: young Seth gets
caught, loses one of his fingers, goes back in time, escapes, while
young Seth gets caught, loses one of his fingers, goes back in time,
escapes, etc. With each new choice by the gang to let old Seth change
young Seth’s future (and thus old Seth’s past), we head into a new
timeloop, where old Seth has a different past (and thus different
memories and different missing limbs).

In the first main timeloop (shown second in the movie, via a flashback),
young Joe shoots old Joe, goes to China, becomes an unusually-talented
agent of violence, finds true love, is kidnapped and sent back in time,
and gets killed by young Joe, who goes on to do the same thing. This too
is a nice stable timeloop.

But on one of these runs through the loop, old Joe manages to overpower
the guards and, while he does go back in time, he manages to keep young
Joe from killing him. He escapes into the field, finds the location of
young Cid, then comes back to shoot Cid’s mother while Cid escapes into
field and stows away on a train. Cid grows up to be the Rainmaker and
Joe grows old. Cid’s henchmen murder old Joe’s wife but are overpowered
by old Joe, who goes back in time to try again to kill Cid, who again
escapes to become the Rainmaker and kill Joe’s wife. This too is a
stable timeloop, although we see some of it only in speculative
flash-forwards (I’ll explain why in a moment).

Which timeloop are we watching? Well, we’re watching the story of a
particular instance of Joe, who we’ll call Movie Joe. Movie Joe only
exists, however, because of a choice made by Flashback Joe (the Joe we
see in the flashback that begins when Movie Joe is falling from his
apartment). Flashback Joe is born, grows up, decides to give up Seth,
closes his own loop, grows old, overpowers the henchmen, goes back in
time, knocks out Movie Joe, hunts down Cid, and is about to kill Cid’s
mother.

But Flashback Joe is not the protagonist of the film. The protagonist is
Movie Joe. Movie Joe is born, grows up, decides to give up Seth, fails
to close his loop, goes to protect Cid. Normally, young Joe fails and
heads into a timeloop where Cid stows away on the train and becomes the
Rainmaker. But Movie Joe somehow is able to foresee this future and
concludes the only way to prevent it is to kill himself. Since he dies
there, he never grows old and never goes back in time, leading to a
timeline where Flashback Joe doesn’t ever exist. Note, this is not a
stable timeloop (because Movie Joe only kills himself to stop Flashback
Joe, who can’t exist if Movie Joe kills himself) but instead just a
garden-variety timeline. In this timeline, presumably, Sarah keeps Cid
from growing evil and everything ends happily ever after.

Next week we’ll explain *Primer*.


What Happens in *The Dark Knight*
=================================

November 1, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdk)

* * * * *

*Spoilers, obviously.*

As we’ve discussed, in [*Batman
Begins*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/batmanbegins) 1960s-style full
employment and antipoverty programs lead to skyrocketing crime while in
[*The Dark Knight Rises*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr)
1980s-style tough-on-crime policies and neoliberal economics lead to a
revolt of the economic underclass. The films are mirror images, one
about the failure of liberal policies; the other about the failure of
conservative policies. In this sense, *The Dark Knight* is truly the
final film in this nihilistic trilogy, documenting the hopelessness of
anything outside that usual left-right struggle.

From the start, the city is torn about how to handle the Batman, who has
inspired a wave of second-rate imitators. Some believe it’s wrong to be
idolizing a masked vigilante, but most (including the new DA, Harvey
Dent) approve of his results.

Dent is doing his own part to lock up the criminals, working inside the
system. He’s arrested all the mob bankers (except Lau) and is now going
after the gangsters themselves, starting with mob boss Maroni (who took
over for mob boss Falcone). But while the prosecutions bring him a great
deal of political attention, they don’t seem to achieve much in the way
of concrete results — new gangsters spring up to take the place of
whoever Dent arrests.

Dent decides the only way to win is to go big — really big. He arrests
everyone at once, on charges that are unlikely to stick. Dent doesn’t
care that he’s breaking the rules, as long as it solves the problem. He
cites the Romans who suspended democracy to protect their city.
(Although, as Rachel points out, they ended up losing democracy.) “You
either die a hero or you live long enough to see yourself become the
villain,” Dent explains. He hopes to take up Batman’s mantle, but do it
from inside the system.

But, as the mayor explains, Dent isn’t just taking on his own sense of
ethics, he’s taking on the entire system: “the mob, politicians,
journalists, cops — anyone whose wallet’s about to get lighter”. If he
fails, both of their careers are over.

Just as Dent is frustrated with the justice system, the Joker is
frustrated with the criminals. He tells them they need to go big: they
need to kill the Batman. He offers to do it for a sizable sum of money,
which the gangsters eventually agree to. The Joker is obsessed with the
*homo economicus* of game theory (from whence his name?): when the
gangsters ask why he needs the money to kill the Batman, he explains
“Like my mother used to tell me: if you’re good at something, never do
it for free.”

The film opens with the Joker hiring five men to rob a mob bank: Dopey
silences the alarm, Happy shoots him and drills through the vault,
Grumpy shoots him and empties the cash into duffel bags, a bus runs him
over, Bozo shoots the bus driver. Finally, Bozo pulls off his mask to
reveal he’s the Joker. This is a classic [pirate
game](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirate_game) and, just as in the
theory, the Joker gets to keep almost all the cash.

Batman eventually tries to track down the Joker by threatening the
gangster Maroni. But it’s no use, as Maroni explains: “No one’s gonna
tell you anything—they’re wise to your act—you got rules. The Joker,
he’s got no rules. No one’s gonna cross him for you.” This is a
straightforward application of game theory’s [Davies-Folk
theorem](http://crookedtimber.org/2006/11/29/reputations-are-made-of/):
the rational thing is to seem irrational so your opponents can’t count
on you doing the rational thing.

Alfred sees this quickly, because it reminds him of a story from his own
past:

> I was in Burma. A long time ago. My friends and I were working for the
> local government. They were trying to buy the loyalty of tribal
> leaders, bribing them with precious stones. But their caravans were
> being raided in a forest north of Rangoon by a bandit. We were asked
> to take care of the problem, so we started looking for the stones. But
> after six months, we couldn’t find *anyone* who had traded with him. …
> One day I found a child playing with a ruby as big as a tangerine. …
> The bandit had been throwing the stones away. … Some men just want to
> watch the world burn.

Note the parallels. In Alfred’s story the entire status quo (including
the local government and tribal leaders) is totally corrupt: *the
official plan* is to bribe people. But the plan is defeated by someone
even crazier, someone willing to steal the money but not interested in
keeping it for himself.

Sure enough, when the Joker finally does get his hands on the money, he
merely lights it on fire.

Meanwhile, Dent’s ethical compromises begin to grow and grow. When he
kidnaps one of the Joker’s thugs, he tries to threaten information out
of him. This is something Batman does routinely, but Batman reminds Dent
that Dent can’t get away with that sort of thing — it’d destroy his
credibility as an insider.

In a climactic scene, the Batman finally confronts the Joker in the
middle of the street. The Joker knows Batman lives by just one rule (“I
will not be an executioner”) and encourages him to break it and kill
him. But Batman can’t bring himself to do it, he swerves at a key moment
and ends up smashed while the Joker survives. (Yep: the Joker has just
won the game of [chicken](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicken_(game)).)

When he comes to, the Joker tells Batman that despite nominally working
outside the system, he’s actually just the system’s pawn:

> To them you’re a freak like me. They just need you right now. … But as
> soon as they don’t, they’ll cast you out like a leper. … Their morals,
> their code… it’s a bad joke. Dropped at the first sign of trouble.
> They’re only as good as the world *allows* them to be. You’ll see—I’ll
> show you…
>
> You have these rules. And you think they’ll save you. … [But t]he only
> sensible way to live in this world is *without* rules.

Gordon arrests the Joker and takes him to the major crimes unit, only to
find the Joker claiming Gordon does not actually control the unit — his
people actually working for mob boss Maroni. “Does it depress you,
Lieutenant, to know how alone you are?” he asks (a classic
[principal-agent
problem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal-agent_problem)).

The Joker has kidnapped both Dent and Rachel and set them both to blow
so that Batman can only rescue one ([opportunity
cost](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost)). Batman goes to
rescue Rachel but the Joker has switched their addresses and he actually
ends up rescuing Dent^[1](#fn:pb)^. Rachel dies and Dent loses half his
face, becoming Two-Face.

Reese, one of Bruce Wayne’s employees goes on TV and threatens to reveal
the identity of the Batman, but the Joker calls in and asks him to stop.
“I had a vision,” he says. “Of a world without Batman. The mob ground
out a little profit and the police tried to shut them down, one block at
a time… and it was so… boring. I’ve had a change of heart.” He threatens
to blow up a hospital unless someone kills Reese. (He has thus
constructed a [trolley
problem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trolley_problem): people must
decide whether it’s better to let the 100 die or kill the 1.)

At the hospital, the Joker explains things to Dent:

> Do I really look like a guy with a plan, Harvey? I don’t have a plan…
> The mob has plans, the cops have plans. … Maroni has plans. Gordon has
> plans. Schemers trying to control their worlds. I’m not a schemer, I
> show the schemers how pathetic their attempts to control things really
> are.
>
> It’s the schemers who put you where you are. You were a schemer. You
> had plans. Look where it got you. … Nobody panics when the *expected*
> people get killed. Nobody panics when things go according to plan,
> even if the plan is horrifying. If I tell the press that tomorrow a
> gangbanger will get shot, or a truckload of soldiers will be blown up,
> nobody panics. Because it’s all part of the plan. But when I say that
> one little old mayor will die, everybody loses their minds! Introduce
> a little anarchy, you upset the established order and everything
> becomes chaos. I’m an agent of chaos. And you know the thing about
> chaos, Harvey? … It’s *fair*.

This pushes Dent over the edge. He starts going after everyone
responsible for killing Rachel: He starts with Weurtz, who kidnapped
him. Weurtz gives up Maroni, who points to Ramirez, who helps him get
Gordon’s family, who naturally gets Gordon.

Batman, meanwhile, is also crossing lines. In his attempt to find the
Joker, he has turned every cell phone into a spy device. Even he admits
this might be too much power for one man to have.

The Joker scares the city onto its two ferries. Once the ferries are in
the middle of the water, he cuts their power and gives them both a
button to blow up the other ferry, thereby constructing a [prisoner’s
dilemma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma) (one boat is
filled with real prisoners). The passengers discuss and vote. One of the
prisoners makes a [Ulysses
pact](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulysses_pact) and [credibly
commits](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_inconsistency) by tossing
the detonator overboard.

The Joker also took a busload of people from the hospital to the Prewitt
Building where, through the window, you can see Joker’s thugs with guns
holding hospital people hostage. Gordon rushes in to get the thugs, but
Batman discovers the thugs are hostages and the hostages are the thugs.
(The Joker is illustrating [“The Market for
Lemons”](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Market_for_Lemons): if the
Joker is making it easy for you to kill his henchmen, why should you
believe they’re actually his henchmen?)

(Batman saves the hostages (dressed as thugs) and stops the SWAT team
and takes out the thugs (dressed as hostages). Neither of the boats
decides to blow up the other and Batman prevents the Joker from
triggering the failsafe.)

He then goes to rescue Gordon, who is trying to stop Dent from killing
his family. Dent explains his new philosophy:

> You thought we could be decent men in an indecent time. You thought we
> could lead by example. You thought the rules could be bent but not
> break…^[2](#fn:fn1)^ you were wrong. The world is cruel. And the only
> morality in a cruel world is chance. Unbiased. Unprejudiced. *Fair.*

Throughout the film, we’ve seen various desperate attempts to change the
system by ignoring the usual rules: Batman originally thought he could
inspire change by being a cultural exemplar, but only ended up causing a
bunch of kids to get themselves hurt by dressing up as him. Dent thought
he could clean up the system by pushing righteously from the inside, but
ended up cutting more and more ethical corners until his own personal
obsessions ended up making him a monster. The Joker had by far the most
interesting plan: he hoped to out-corrupt the corrupters, to take their
place and give the city “a better class of criminal”.

And the crazy thing is that it works! At the end of the movie, the Joker
is alive, the gangsters and their money launderers are mostly dead, and
their money has been redistributed (albeit though the deflationary
method of setting it on fire). And, as we see from the beginning of the
third movie, this is a fairly stable equilibrium: with politicians no
longer living in fear of the gangsters, they’re free to adopt tough
anti-crime policies that keep them from rising again.^[3](#fn:f)^

The movie concludes by emphasizing that Batman must become the villain,
but as usual it never stops to notice that the Joker is actually the
hero. But even though his various games only have one innocent casualty,
he’s much too crazy to be a viable role model for Batman. His inspired
chaos destroys the criminals, but it also terrorizes the population.
Thanks to Batman, society doesn’t devolve into a self-interested war of
all-against-all, as he apparently expects it to, but that doesn’t mean
anyone enjoys the trials.

Thus Master Wayne is left without solutions. Out of options, it’s no
wonder the series ends with his staged suicide.

* * * * *

1.  I’m actually not sure which game this is supposed to be. It’s a bit
    like the poisoned goblets game in *The Princess Bride*, but I can’t
    find a name for it in the literature. [↩](#fnref:pb)

2.  These two sentences are in the shooting script but got cut from the
    film version: “You thought we could lead by example. You thought the
    rules could be bent but not break…” [↩](#fnref:fn1)

3.  This also explains why the law-and-order crowd seems so miffed about
    succeeding — it wasn’t actually their policies that
    succeeded. [↩](#fnref:f)




