Causes of Conformance
=====================

December 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/conformancing)

* * * * *

Institutions require people to do their bidding. A tobacco company must
find people willing to get kids addicted to cigarettes, a school must
find teachers willing to repeat the same things that they were taught, a
government must find public servants willing to enforce the law.

Part of this is simply necessity. To survive, people need money; to get
money, people need a job; to get a job, people need to find an existing
institution. But the people in these positions don’t usually see
themselves as mercenaries, doing the smallest amount to avoid getting
fired while retaining their own value system. Instead, they adopt the
value system of the institution, pushing it even when it’s not necessary
for their own survival. What explains this pattern of conformance?

The most common explanation is an active process of beating people in:
politicians get paid campaign contributions (legalized bribes) to meet
the needs of the wealthy, employees get bonuses and penalties for
meeting the needs of their employers, kids get threatened with time-outs
and bad grades if they don’t follow the demands of their teachers. In
each case, the people are forced through a series of carrots and sticks
to learn the values of the people in charge.

This is a fairly blatant form of conformance, but I suspect it’s by far
the least effective. Studies on punishment and rewards show that dealing
them out lessens the victim’s identification with the enforcer. Hitting
me every time I don’t do my job right may teach me how to do my job, but
it’s not going to make me particularly excited about it.

Indeed, punishments and rewards interfere with a much more significant
effect: cognitive dissonance. Cognitive dissonance studies have found
that simply by getting you to do something, you can be persuaded to
agree with it. In a classic study, students asked to write an essay in
favor of a certain position were found to agree more with the position
than students who could write for either position. Similarly, people who
pay more to eat a certain food claim to like it more than people who pay
less.

The basic theory is that people work to lessen the disagreement between
their beliefs and their actions and in most cases it’s simply easier to
change your beliefs. Quitting your job for the government is tough and
painful; and who knows if you’ll soon find another? So it’s much easier
to simply persuade yourself that you agree with the government, that
you’re doing the right and noble thing, that your work to earn a
paycheck is really a service to mankind.

Of course, it also helps that everyone you’re surrounded by feels the
same way. Culture is another important influence on our beliefs. Another
raft of social psychology studies find that people are willing to deny
even obvious truths to fit in with a group. In the famous Asch studies
on conformance, a group of confederates were seated around a table, with
the subject of the experiment on the end. Everyone at the table was
given a sheet with three lines, one obviously longer than the other, and
then was asked to name the two lines of identical length. All of the
confederates gave an obviously wrong answer and by the time the question
got to the guy at the end, he ended up conforming and giving the wrong
answer as well.

Similarly, spend your days in government offices where people simply
take it for granted that they’re doing the right thing, and you’re
likely to pick up that tacit assumption yourself. Such ideas are not
only frequently stated, they’re often the very foundation of the
discussion. And foundational ideas are particularly hard to question,
particularly because they’re so taken for granted.

But perhaps the most important effect for conformance is simply
selection. Imagine that nobody was corruptible, that all the carrots and
sticks in the world couldn’t get someone to do something they thought
morally wrong, that they stood fast in the face of cognitive dissonance,
and that their moral fiber was so strong that they were able to resist a
less conscientious culture. Even then, it wouldn’t make much difference.
As long as there was enough variety in people and their moral values,
all an organization would need to do is simply fire (or fail to promote)
everyone who didn’t play their game.

Everyone knows you climb the corporate ladder by being a “team player”.
Those who make a fuss or don’t quite live up to expectations simply get
passed over for a promotion. The result is simply that — without any
explicit pressure at all — the people in positions of power happen to be
the ones who identify with the organization’s aims.

It’s easy to look at the rather more flashy pieces of punishing people
for failing to follow orders or living in a culture of conformity. But
for those who want obedient employees, sometimes the most effective
technique is simply failing to say yes.
