Why I Am Not Gay
================

September 8, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/notgay)

* * * * *

Until recently, men having sex with men was disapproved of in American
culture. Actually, “disapproved of” isn’t really the right word — it was
immoral, illegal, disgusting. People who did it lived in secrecy, under
the constant threat of blackmail for their actions.

In the tumult of the 1960s, various out-groups — blacks, Chicanos,
Native Americans — begun organizing themselves and demanding to be
respected and given their due. And men-who-had-sex-with-men decided that
they were an out-group — they were gay — and they deserved rights too.

In doing so, they transformed an action (having relationships with
someone of the same gender) into an identity (“being gay”). And, using
the normal human mechanisms for distinguishing between people in your
club and those not in it, they closed ranks. Gay men didn’t have sex
with women. Those who did weren’t gay, they were “bi” (which became a
whole new identity in itself) — or probably just lying to themselves.
And straight men had to be on constant guard against being attracted to
other men — if they were, it meant that deep down, they were actually
gay.

This new gay identity was projected back through history — famous
historical figures were “outed” as gay, because they’d once taken lovers
of their own gender. They truly were gay underneath, it was said — it
was just a homophobic society that forced them to appear to like the
opposite sex.

Along with the identity went an attempt at justification. Being gay
wasn’t “a choice,” they argued — it was innate. Some people were just
born gay and others weren’t. To a culture that tried to “correct” gay
people into being straight, they insisted that correction was impossible
— they just weren’t wired this way. (They even provided a ridiculous
genetic explanation for how a species with a small percentage gay people
might evolve.)

This might have been a good thing to say — maybe even necessary in such
a homophobic culture — but in the end it has to be seen as simply wrong.
Having sex with other people of your gender isn’t an identity, it’s an
act. And, like sex in general among consenting adults, people should be
able to do it if they want to. Having sex with someone shouldn’t require
an identity crisis. (Nobody sees having-sex-with-white-people as part of
their identity, even if that’s primarily who they’re attracted to.)

People shouldn’t be forced to categorize themselves as “gay,”
“straight,” or “bi.” People are just people. Maybe you’re mostly
attracted to men. Maybe you’re mostly attracted to women. Maybe you’re
attracted to everyone. These are historical claims — not future
predictions. If we truly want to expand the scope of human freedom, we
should encourage people to date who they want; not just provide more
categorical boxes for them to slot themselves into. A man who has mostly
dated men should be just as welcome to date women as a woman who’s
mostly dated men.

So that’s why I’m not gay. I hook up with people. I enjoy it. Sometimes
they’re men, sometimes they’re women. I don’t see why it needs to be any
more complicated than that.
