---
layout: post
title:  "バチあたりな「ヤバい経済学」"
date:   2005/06/17 00:00
---

Original: [The Immorality of Freakonomics](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/immoralfreaks)

----------

<!--
As the hype around the book *Freakonomics* reaches absurd proportions
(now an “international bestseller”, the authors have been signed for a
monthly column in the *New York Times Magazine*), I think it’s time to
discuss some of the downsides that I mostly left out of my main review.
The most important of which is that economist Stephen Levitt simply does
not appear to care — or even notice — if his work involves doing evil
things.
-->
書籍「ヤバい経済学」の誇大広告も異常なほどに溢れちゃってるし(いまや「世界中で大ヒット！」らしく、著者たちは *New York Times Magazine* で記事を書くまでになった。)、そろそろ、メインの書評の方では触れなかったこの本の悪いところについて議論されてもいい頃だと思う。特に議論すべきは、経済学者 Stephen Levitt が自身の仕事を通じての悪事への加担について、意にも介さぬように見える点だ。

<!--
The 1960s, as is well-known, had a major civilizing effect on all areas
of American life. Less well-known, however, was the immediate pushback
from the powerful centers of society. The process involved a great
number of things, notably the network of right-wing think tanks I’ve
written about elsewhere, but in the field of education it led to a
crackdown on “those institutions which have played the major role in the
indoctrination of the young”, as a contemporary report (*The Crisis of
Democracy*) put it.
-->
知ってのとおり、1960年代はアメリカ全土で市民運動が盛んだった。一方あまり知られていないけれど、既得権益層からの反対もすぐに起こっていた。それらの過程は膨大で(どっかに書いたけど、特に右翼系シンクタンクの連携がすごかった)、教育の分野においては「学生たちを洗脳するという過程で重要な役割を担っていた一部の教育機関」への取り締まりという形で現れた、とよくあるレポート(*The Crisis of Democracy*)だとまとめられてる。

<!--
The indoctrination centers (notably schools) weren’t doing their job
properly and so a back-to-basics approach with more rote memorization of
meaningless facts and less critical thinking and intellectual
development was needed. This was mainly done under the guise of
“accountability”, for both students and teachers. 

Standardized tests,
you see, would see how well students had memorized certain pointless
facts and students would not be allowed to deviate from their assigned
numbers. Teachers too would have their jobs depend on the test scores
their students got. Teachers who decided to buck the system and actually
have their students learn something worthwhile would get demoted or even
fired.
-->
洗脳機関(特に学校)は役割を果たせていなかったので、基本に返った手法、丸暗記重視・批判的思考力や知的発達軽視を主とした手法が求められていた。そしてそれは、教師・生徒ともに「説明責任」という形で為されることとなった。例えば一斉テスト、これは決められた物事を生徒がどれだけ正確に暗記したかのみを調べるものであって、指示から逸れるのは論外だった。また、教師の業績は生徒のテスト成績で測られていた。制度に背き、有意義なことを生徒に教えようとした教師は、降格させられたり職を失う羽目になった。

<!--
Not surprisingly, as always happens when you make people’s lives depend
on an artificial test, teachers begun cheating. And it is here that
Professor Levitt enters the story. He excitedly signed up with the
Chicago Public School system to try to build a system that would catch
cheating teachers. Levitt and his co-author write excitedly about this
system and the clever patterns it discovers in the data, but mostly
ignore the question of whether helping to get these teachers fired is a
good idea. Apparently even rogue economists jump when the government
asks them to.
-->


<!--
Levitt has a few arguments — teachers were setting students up to fail
in the higher grade they would be advanced to — but these are tacked on
as afterthoughts. Levitt never stops to ask whether contributing to the
indoctrination of the young or getting teachers fired might not be an
acceptable area of work, despite being an economist, he never weighs any
benefits or even considers the costs.
-->

<!--
Levitt, by all appearances, was not, like some of his colleagues, a
self-conscious participant in this regressive game. He was just a rube
who got taken in. But surely preventing others from the same fate would
be a more valuable contribution.
-->