Gmail Down
==========

May 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gmaildown)

* * * * *

My Gmail account has been down for over two days. When I try to log in,
it says it’s down for maintenance and they don’t know how long it will
take. When I try to get my mail through POP, it simply doesn’t work. And
when I contact the Gmail people, all I get back is form responses. I’ve
used Gmail as my mail client for the past couple years, so if you’ve
sent me mail and I haven’t responded — that’s why.

The thing that really puzzles me is *why*. I can understand occasional
outtages, but I can’t understand what could cause my account to go down
for days, unless they lost my data and are too embarassed to actually
tell me. The only thing I can think of is that something went wrong and
there’s just no one around to fix it. Which, considering Gmail’s
popularity, would be kinda sad.

Sorry to bug you with my personal problems, but obviously it’s time for
me to switch away from Gmail. I’ve been careful to always keep my email
going to my main server, so I haven’t lost too much data, but figuring
out a way to read my mail again is rather difficult.

I get absurd quanities of spam (40,000 spam messages a month) so my
mailboxes are just full of junk. And it’s not clear to me how to clear
it out. A bayesian filter like bogofilter requires non-spam messages to
train on — and if I had my non-spam messages, I wouldn’t need a spam
filter. Spamassassin seems to work better, but it’s incredibly slow and
inaccurate, taking a couple seconds per email (at this rate it will take
days to see my mail again).

If you have any suggestions (or you’re a person at Google who can turn
my account on again) feel free to help. If you want to email me, I’m
checking “feeds@reddit.com”.
