Nutrition Basics
================

July 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/basicnutrition)

* * * * *

As part of changing my eating habits, I’ve become quite interested on
the subject of nutrition. I can’t seem to find a good guide to the
subject online, so in the spirit of flailing in public until someone
comes to my aid, I thought I’d write up what I think I know. Feel free
to correct me or point me to better sources in the comments.

**Calories** are the basis of eating; they’re a measure of the amount of
energy a food provides. Your body gets calories from the food you eat
and spends them to keep you moving. If you get more calories than you
spend, your body stores the excess as fat. If you spend more than you
get, your body burns some of the fat it’s stored up (for just such an
occasion).

Thus the standard advice for losing weight: eat less, exercise more.
Eating less brings fewer calories in, while exercising more uses up more
of them. Unfortunately, both of these things are quite hard to achieve,
because the body seems to regulate them through [the use of “set
points”](http://www.slate.com/id/2663/): your body keeps track of how
much fat you have through a chemical called leptin and makes you hungry
if you’re starting to lose weight. Thus, if you skip a meal in the
morning, it’ll be sure to make you extra hungry in the evening, so that
your overall weight doesn’t change.

A similar setpoint seems to operate for exercise. In one experiment,
doctors measured how much children moved around with pedometers. Then
they tried forcing the children to exercise by giving them a PE class.
They found that when kids were forced to exercise at school, they
exercised less at home, and ended up doing the same amount of exercise
overall. So just as your body seems to make you hungry when you’re
losing weight and full when you’re gaining it, it seems to make you
tired when you’ve burned too many calories and antsy when you haven’t
burned enough.

Of course, we’re not total slaves to such motivations — we can force
ourselves when to eat when full or not to eat when hungry, to exercise
when tired or to stay still when antsy — but it’s worth keeping in mind
what we’re up against.

**Fats** have gotten a bad rap, most likely because they share a name
with body fat but also, [some
argue](http://www.westonaprice.org/knowyourfats/lowfatcapitalism.html),
because they seem lower-class. In truth, however, they’re largely just
one way to get calories, and a calorie is a calorie no matter where it
comes from.

Fats also have effects on **cholesterol**, a key building block for your
body’s cells. There are two types of cholesterol — known informally as
good and bad cholesterol. Good cholesterol consists of tightly-packed
proteins of cholesterol in your blood stream, allowing cholesterol to be
efficiently transported where it needs to go. Bad cholesterol is less
densely packed and its cholesterol ends up sticking in the walls of
arteries, clogging them and leading to heart disease. Fats have varying
effects on cholesterol. Saturated fats should be avoided: they increase
levels of bad cholesterol (although they also increase good
cholesterol). Unsaturated fats, however, whether monounsaturated or
polyunsaturated, are good: they lower bad cholesterol and raising good
cholesterol. *Trans* fats are just the reverse: they increase bad
cholesterol levels *and* decrease good ones; it’s recommended they be
avoided as much as possible.

Often nutrition labels only break out unsaturated fats and trans fats;
you have to calculate the amount of saturated fat by subtracting these
from the amount of total fat. The goal, remember, is to avoid trans fats
whenever possible, avoid saturated fats, and go for unsaturated fats.

**Carbohydrates** are another source of calories, the kind found in
white wheat products, like bread and pasta. **Sugars** are a form of
carbohydrate and, in fact, the body breaks down other carbohydrates into
simple sugars. The problem with sugars is that they go directly into the
bloodstream, spiking your blood sugar level. This in itself is
unhealthy, but it’s even worse when the level inevitably crashes and you
begin to feel hungry again and eat even more.

The exception is with fiber, which the body can’t break down. Foods made
from whole wheat are high in fiber, so your body takes longer to digest
them and the sugar intake is spread out over a longer period of time.
Thus while carbohydrates might generally be avoided, whole wheat
products (along with fruits and vegetables), include additional
nutrients as well as having a safe impact on blood sugar, and are the
foundation of a healthy diet.

**Protein** is a similar essential nutrient, allowing the body to make
essential components of muscle and hair and so on. If you don’t get
enough (about 9 grams of protein for every 20 pounds), the body begins
breaking down its tissues. (Eating far too much protein, however, as
people in low-carb diets do, can be unhealthy as it absorbs calcium from
your bones.) While protein can be found in animal products, whole wheat
bread is a also an excellent source — a single slice contains five grams
of protein. Unfortunately, the proteins found in grains and vegetables
are incomplete, so you either need to get some (complete) animal protein
or eat a variety of them.

**Calcium** is necessary for building bones and teeth, maintaining the
heart’s rhythmym, and more. Deficiency can lead to weakened bones and
fractures. While dairy products contain significant amounts of calcium,
they also contain a lot of saturated fat and has been linked to some
cancers. Many other foods are fortified with calcium and some vegetables
(kale and collard greens, dried beans, and legumes) are also a good
source.

**Vitamins** do all sorts of good things, as well as warding off
diseases like scurvy and rickets. They’re often added to juices and
cereals and can be taken by themselves in a daily multivitamin as well.

For additional information, check out:

-   [Nutrition Source](http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/),
    Harvard School of Public Health

