Office Space
============

November 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/officespace)

* * * * *

People are always asking me how I manage to get so much done. For a
while I tried to impress them with [my pearls of
wisdom](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity) but soon I just sort
of gave up. I don’t really feel like I do anything special — I worry
about getting stuff done a lot, but mostly I just sort of do it.

It wasn’t until I started working in an office that the question begun
to make sense. Since I moved to San Francisco I literally haven’t gotten
anything done. I haven’t finished a book (I finished three on the plane
out here), I haven’t answered many emails (I used to answer hundreds a
day), I’ve written only a couple blog posts (I used to do one a day),
and I haven’t written a line of code (I used to write whole programs in
the evenings). It’s a pretty incredible state of affairs.

You wake up in the morning, take some crushing public transit system or
dodge oncoming traffic to get to work, grab some food, and then sit down
at your desk. If you’re like most people, you sit at a cube in the
middle of the office, with white noise buzzing around on every side.
We’re lucky enough to get our own shared office, but it’s not much
better since it’s huge windows overlook a freeway and the resulting
white noise is equally deadening.

Wired has tried to make the offices look exciting by painting the walls
bright pink but the gray office monotony sneaks through all the same.
Gray walls, gray desks, gray noise. The first day I showed up here, I
simply couldn’t take it. By lunch time I had literally locked myself in
a bathroom stall and started crying. I can’t imagine staying sane with
someone buzzing in my ear all day, let alone getting any actual work
done.

Nobody else seems to get work done here either. Everybody’s always
coming into our room to hang out and chat or invite us to play the new
video game system that *Wired* is testing. The upside is that while we
haven’t gotten much of our work done, we have managed to do many other
people’s. Various folks from around the office have shown up to have us
help them with their technical problems, which we usually solve fairly
quickly. We joked that we should get transferred to their IT department
instead of Web development.

We’ve been spared most of the brunt of it, but their IT policy is pretty
scary. There’s a company Internet connection, which routes everything
through the IT HQ in Delaware, presumably the better to spy on us on. On
Day 1 they took our laptops and “backed up” the drives to ensure they
had a copy of all our data. (We scurried to get our MP3 collections and
worse off first.)

Then they issued us company-approved laptops: terribly-slow iBook G4s
complete with Conde Nast desktop and screensaver with spy software
pre-installed. When they gave us the machines we didn’t even have
administrator access on them. The clock was set to the Eastern time
zone; I needed an IT department person to change it to show me
California time.

The company laptop is necessary to read our company email which, being
on a Microsoft Exchange server, requires a special Microsoft email
client to read. You also need to be on a company laptop to access the
company network, where you can log into a maze of PeopleSoft web sites
to file expense reports and change your health benefits.

I feel wiped after dealing with this non-work for a couple hours, but I
can’t get any rest from lying on our couch because it too is surrounded
by the white noise.

Finally at 5 the office empties out and I can go home where, to
compensate for the dullness of the days, I brighten up the nights.
Life-threatening bicycle rides, dinners and movies with friends,
museums, running along the beach, navigating the nightmare of public
transit to visit the new hot spot. And if I get home early there are the
roommates eager to chat about their days. By the time I break away it’s
midnight, if not 3am. I had to spend much of the weekend sleeping just
to catch up.

And then it’s back to the grind once again. A carousel that never stops
to let you get off.
