Apple and the Kindle
====================

November 3, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kindledetails)

* * * * *

The Amazon Kindle is full of all sorts of amazing, delightful touches —
the sort of thing you’d expect from an Apple product. For example, when
you first take your Kindle out of its (gorgeous!) box, it boots right up
knowing your name and logged into your account. This is actually
out-Apple-ing Apple: it’s possible because Amazon not only controls the
hardware and the software, but the entire distribution channel; they
know exactly who is going to get each Kindle.

And think about how the original Kindle came with a *lifetime*
*unlimited* *worldwide* data plan. Imagine how much that must have cost!
All so that you never had to think about syncing again: your Kindle was
automatically synced, no matter where it was in the world.

Bezos must have spent tons of energy getting this stuff right. And he
must be sitting there, pissed, that Steve Jobs gets all these laurels
while no one ever recognizes the stuff he’s done. But I don’t think
that’s because Jobs is a better marketer and showman than Bezos (that’s
the easy way out); it’s because the small details that delight get
buried under small details that annoy.

For example, if you download a sample of a book and get to the end and
decide to purchase the whole thing, the sample doesn’t expand to
download the remainder of the book — instead the full book downloads
completely separately and you have to manually copy over all your
highlights and annotations to the full one. (You can’t just keep them in
the sample because sample’s don’t even sync; you have to download a
sample manually to each of your devices and hand-synchronize the page
numbers.)

Or (and this is incredibly aggravating) when you select a word in the
Kindle, depending on how common a word it is, the option that comes up
highlighted by default is either “full definition” or “start highlight”.
Since e-ink’s refresh rate is so slow, you typically don’t see what’s
actually come up until you’ve pressed the button for the second time. So
I often “double click” on words to highlight them, but some percentage
of the time this kicks me over into the dictionary and I have to hit
back twice to get out.

And this is all before I’ve even got to the disastrous incompatibilities
between the Kindle device, the Kindle for Mac app, the Kindle for iOS
app, the Kindle Online Reader (read.amazon.com), and the
kindle.amazon.com social network — all of which are full of gruesome
interface annoyances of their own.

That’s the thing about delightful details: they’re not just another
thing you can add on top. Unless you sweat the details all the way
through the user experience, the ones that delight quickly get drowned
out by the ones that constantly annoy. I hope someone at Amazon will
take that to heart.
