Theory of Change
================

March 14, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theoryofchange)

* * * * *

I am increasingly convinced that the difference between effective and
ineffective people is their skill at developing a theory of change.
Theory of change is a funny phrase — I first heard it in the nonprofit
community, but it’s also widespread in politics and really applies to
just about everything. Unfortunately, very few people seem to be very
good at it.

Let’s take a concrete example. Imagine you want to decrease the size of
the defense budget. The typical way you might approach this is to look
around at the things you know how to do and do them on the issue of
decreasing the defense budget. So, if you have a blog, you might write a
blog post about why the defense budget should be decreased and tell your
friends about it on Facebook and Twitter. If you’re a professional
writer, you might write a book on the subject. If you’re an academic,
you might publish some papers. Let’s call this strategy a “theory of
action”: you work *forwards* from what you know how to do to try to find
things you can do that will accomplish your goal.

A theory of change is the opposite of a theory of action — it works
backwards from the goal, in concrete steps, to figure out what you can
do to achieve it. To develop a theory of change, you need to start at
the end and repeatedly ask yourself, “Concretely, how does one achieve
that?” A decrease in the defense budget: how does one achieve that? Yes,
you.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Congress passes a new budget with a smaller
authorization for defense next year.

Yes, that’s true — but let’s get more concrete. How does that happen?

AUDIENCE: Uh, you get a majority of the House and Senate to vote for it
and the President to sign it.

Great, great — so how do you get them to do that? Now we have to think
about what motivates politicians to support something. This is a really
tricky question, but it’s totally crucial if we want to be effective.
After all, if we don’t eventually motivate the politicians, then what
we’ve done is useless for achieving our goal. (Unless we can think of
some other way to shrink the defense budget.)

But this is also not an insoluble problem. Put yourself in the shoes of
a politician for a moment. What would motivate you? Well, on the one
hand, there’s what you think is right. Then there’s what will help you
get reelected. And finally there’s peer pressure and other sort of
psychological motivations that get people to do things that don’t meet
their own goals.

So the first would suggest a strategy of persuading politicians that
cutting the defense budget was a good idea. The second would suggest
organizing a constituency in their districts that would demand they cut
the defense budget. And maybe one of you can figure out how to use the
third—that’s a little trickier.

But let’s stick with the first, since that’s the most standard. What
convinces politicians that something is the right thing to do?

AUDIENCE: Their beliefs?

In a sense, I suppose. But those are going to be pretty hard to change.
I’m thinking more, if you have a politician with a given set of beliefs,
how do you convince them that cutting the defense budget advances those
beliefs?

AUDIENCE: You outline why to them.

Well, OK, let’s think about that. Do you think if you ran into Nancy
Pelosi in the hallway here and you tried to explain to her why cutting
the defense budget would accomplish her beliefs, that you’d convince
her?

AUDIENCE: Probably not.

Why not?

AUDIENCE: Because she wouldn’t really listen to me — she’d just smile
and nod.

Yeah. Nancy Pelosi doesn’t trust you. She’s never met you. You’re not
particularly credible. So you need to find people the politicians trust
and get them to convince the politicians.

Alright, well, we can continue down this road for a while — figuring out
who politicians trust, figuring out how to persuade *them*, figuring out
how to get them to, in turn, persuade the politicians, etc. Then, when
the politicians are persuaded, there’s the task of developing something
they can vote for, getting it introduced so they can vote on it, then
getting them to vote on the specific measure even when they agree with
the overall idea. You can see that this can take quite a while.

It’s not easy. It could take a while before you get to a concrete action
that you can take. But do you see how this is entirely crucial if you
want to be effective? Now maybe if you’re only writing a blog post, it’s
not worth it. Not everything we do has to be maximally effective. But DC
is filled with organizations that spend millions of dollars each year
and have hardly even begun to think about these questions. I’m not
saying their money is totally wasted — it certainly has some positive
impacts — but it could do so much more if the people in charge thought,
concretely, about how it was supposed to accomplish their goals.

I’ll close with one more example, showing how this strategy can be used
personally as well. I was at a party once and I told someone I was
writing a book and that I wanted it to be a bestseller. They laughed at
that and I think it’s because they had a theory of action model in their
head: you write the best book you can, and of course you want it to be a
bestseller, but either it does or it doesn’t.

But I was working backwards, I had a theory of change: I asked, What
makes something a best seller? Well, lots of people buy it. OK, how do
you get lots of people to buy something? Well, you have to persuade them
it’s something they want. OK, how do you persuade them it’s something
they want? Well, first it has to meet some desire or need they have and
second you need to explain to them how it meets that need. So what are
the desires or needs people have? (Looking at bestsellers:
entertainment, escape, self-improvement, etc.) What are the ways of
explaining your book meets their need? (Being popular early on,
appearances in the media, persuading readers to tell other readers,
etc.)

Again, we can keep going for quite a while until we get all the way back
to something I can actually do. But because of this, I didn’t have to
simply have to hope that my book became a bestseller, like every other
author. I could actually do something about it.

That’s the power of a theory of change.
