Bubble City: Chapter 10
=======================

November 19, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity10)

* * * * *

Wayne met Samuel, his Google contact, at a San Francisco bar. They were
already several drinks in when the conversation turned to
business.”Well, I’ve got the Center all up and running,” he said.
“That’s great to hear. Congratulations. That’s just fantastic.” “There’s
just one problem.” “Oh?” “I don’t know what to do with it.” “Oh, don’t
worry. You can do whatever you want. I mean, we’ll have some requests
from time to time but it’s your project — feel free to do whatever you
want to do.”

“But that’s just what I mean,” Wayne said. “I don’t know what I want to
do.” “Come on, surely there must be something?” “Not really. What are
you working on these days?” “Oh, all sorts of things. You know, it’s
pretty crazy as usual. You’re on the Google NDA right?” “Yeah, and the
corporate email system and contracts and everything.” “OK, so then I can
tell you a bit. You know how the job is: tracking down people to co-opt
or destroy.” “Must be exciting.”

“Not usually. Although one exciting thing happened lately. We’re doing a
manhunt on this NNA stuff.” “A what?” “Apparently some kid found out
something he wasn’t supposed to and we’re tracking him down.” “Huh?
Tracking him down?” “Well, he booked when he found out we were on his
tail, so we get to use all our databases to try and figure out where he
fled to and how to get him back. He’s a smart kid — MIT grad, hacker,
etc. — so it’s actually a really fun puzzle. The guys back at HQ are
loving it. It’s like their college puzzle hunts all over again.”

“So what do you do when you find him?” Wayne asked. “The usual,” Samuel
said as if it was obvious. “Co-opt or destroy.” “But how do you destroy
a kid?” “Oh, that’s actually quite fun, although obviously not ideal for
the bottom line. Basically we take him out and then falsify a whole
bunch of evidence to make it look like an accident. You wouldn’t believe
the quality of the data forgers we have on staff — best guys in the
business.”

“Wait? Take him out — you mean you’ll kill him?” “Not usually; bodies
are messy to clean up that way. Usually we just expose them to chemicals
or shocks or some other brain-rotting substance. They live, but not with
an IQ that will be of any worry for us.” “Wow, geez,” Wayne said, a bit
taken aback. “I had no idea Google did stuff like that.” “Oh, come on,
Wayne, don’t be naive. You of all people should know better than that.”
“Oh, I’m not be—” “It’s just the price of doing business,” Samuel
continued. “Every company has its little hidden costs. Factories dump
harmful chemicals wherever seems convenient. Pharmaceutical companies
cover up their products’ harms. Conglomerates bribe foreign governments.
Clothing companies engage in human trafficking. Scratch any serious
company and you’ll find some dark little secret. That’s what makes the
money go ‘round.”

“Yes, but well, taking people out. Isn’t that a bit extreme?” “Oh, so
when [Shell takes out labor
activists](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Saro-Wiwa), that’s OK. And
when [GAP condemns young women to a life of involuntary
servitude](http://www.coopamerica.org/programs/rs/profile.cfm?id=229),
that’s OK. And when [GE dumbs tons of PCBs into the Hudson
River](http://www.cleanupge.org/), that’s just fine. But Google messes
with one or two people and it’s suddenly the end of the world? How is
that fair?”

“Look, Wayne, Google’s [one of the ten biggest US
companies](http://bigpicture.typepad.com/comments/2007/11/google-5-us-mar.html).
If you think we’re going to keep acting like some little software shop
in Mountain View, you’re crazy.” “I know, I know, but I thought Google
was supposed to be different. What happened to Don’t Be Evil?” Samuel
laughed. “Don’t Be Evil was some hacker’s PR ploy that got out of hand.
Paul Buchheit, the guy who made Gmail, suggested it in an early meeting
and Amit Patel, another early Googler starting writing it on whiteboards
everywhere. A journalist saw it and the rest was history — but don’t be
mistaken, it was never official corporate policy.”

“But come on, Samuel, just between us, don’t you ever feel a little bit
guilty about all this?” “Look Wayne, what good would it do? If I raise
complaints about it to my superior they’ll mark me as unstable and
demote me. If I threaten to go public they’ve got an ironclad NDA —
they’ll take away my house and family with their crack team of lawyers
and I’ll spend the rest of my life at a minimum wage job. And if even
that doesn’t scare me, then they’ll turn the black ops on me too. When
they’re through with me, I’ll be such a gibbering paranoid idiot that
nobody will take anything I say seriously. So it’s stupid to even think
about this stuff.”

“But what about your superior? Why not convince him?” “Come on, Wayne,
you can’t even convince me this is the wrong thing; you think I’m going
to be able to convince a guy who does this sort of thing his entire
life? And even if I do, then what? He gets fired and ruined right along
with me. Why bring another person in on this mess? What good does that
do?”

Wayne took a long sigh. “But surely, at some fundamental level, you’ve
got to realize this is wrong? Has Google entirely taken away your
humanity?” “Oh come on, Wayne, that’s not humanity, that’s naievete.
Sure, when they’re a kid everyone thinks they’ll fight for truth and
justice and the American way of not torturing people. But you also want
to succeed. And success requires compromise; there’s no other way. If
you don’t compromise then they just filter you out. You’re labeled
‘difficult’ or ‘uncooperative’ or ‘insubordinate’. Believe me; I’ve seen
it dozens of times. I’ve even done it myself when it had to be done. By
the time you get to a position like mine, you begin to realize that this
is just the way the world works. And what are you supposed to do about
that, huh, Wayne?”

“Look Wayne, I’m telling you all this because I know you’re a smart guy.
Your heart’s in the right place, but so is your head. Google’s counting
on you to be a big success and you can’t do stuff like that if you have
to worry about every little kid that needs to be quashed. So here, I’ll
pick up the tab. Why don’t you go home and get yourself some rest? And
then tomorrow I’ll give you a call and we’ll pick out some fun projects
for you to work on? Doesn’t that sound good?”

“Yeah,” Wayne said at last. “I guess so. God, I don’t know what’s gotten
into me. I used to be such a hard-head.” “I know, Wayne, I know. That’s
what I like about you. You did whatever it took to get ahead. Look,
everyone goes thru this the first time they have to cross a line. I
certainly had my fair share of sleepless nights. But you come out of it
smarter and stronger. I promise you, you wake up tomorrow morning,
you’ll be a better man — ready to conquer anything. Now go and get some
rest.” “OK, Samuel. And thanks for the drinks.” “Don’t thank me,” Samuel
said. “Thank Google.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Eleven](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity11)
