Mr. Millionaire
===============

November 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mrmillionaire)

* * * * *

*While I’m moving I’ll be running old tortured-psyche fiction pieces.
This one was written in August of 2005, shortly after the first Summer
Founders Program ended.*

I kiss my girlfriend goodbye before walking down the front steps into
the waiting cab. We whir towards the airport. I’ve done this so many
times that the whole act becomes some sort of choreographed dance: step
and lift and pull the suitcase, slam the car door and run towards the
airport. Wave my card at security and take the express lane.

Onboard the plane, I grab my business class seat and push the seat all
the way back, just to remember how it feels. I try to get some sleep but
all too soon we’re there. I grab my bag and head to pick up my rental
car. I toss my luggage in and pretty soon I’m speeding down the
beautiful California road.

‘Ah, Mr. Delboy,’ says the receptionist. ‘We’ve been expecting you.’ She
leads me to a conference room. I take a seat at the tip of the long
table, which stretches all the way down the room, before stopping at a
mahogany bookcase whose shelves remain empty. A fluorescent light gives
everything that yellow glow. Three older men sit on my left, three older
men sit on my right. ‘Let’s get down to business, Mr. Delboy,’ says the
first man on my left. ‘Please, call me Jules,’ I say. ‘We’ve talked it
over and we’re willing to offer three million.’

I lean back in my chair and laugh. ‘Three million?’ I say, turning
serious. ‘Please, I could find three million in my fucking couch. Don’t
waste my time with this stuff.’ I begin to get up. ‘No, wait,’ cries the
first man on the right. ‘Will you take five?’ I sit back down again.
‘Ten,’ I say. ‘Five and a half,’ he says. ‘Ten,’ I say. ‘We’ll have to
discuss it.’

* * * * *

Back in Massachusetts, I head over to visit my friend Lou. Also a
programmer, he was laid off six months ago by a local enterprise
consulting company. Judging by the mounting pile of beer bottles, he’s
had a rough time of it since. He plops down in the couch,
absent-mindedly flicking on and off the TV. FOX News pops on. ‘God, I
hate these twits,’ he says. ‘And the spineless Dems are no better,’ he
adds. ‘I recently got this fancy-schmancy direct mail survey from them
asking what I thought the most important political issue was. There were
all the usual options: Iraq war, social security, health care,
outsourcing — but what about the poor, man? What about those people
whose lives really suck? They keep trying to railroad politics into this
safe little issue-oriented bullshit. When is real change going to
happen?’

‘So, uh, my company is going well,’ I say, trying to change the subject.
‘Yeah?’ he says disinterestedly. ‘Yeah, we got offered five but I’m
trying to push them to ten.’ ‘Thousand?’ he says. ‘Million,’ I say.
‘Fuck, man,’ he says, ‘a million dollars? You have any idea how many
mouths you can feed with that?’ ‘Hey man, don’t try and pull that hippy
bullshit on me, okay? I’m as liberal as anybody. I donate money to
MoveOn.org, I read *Nickel and Dimed*, I’m totally with you on that
stuff.’

‘Shit, Jules, you don’t even know what that stuff is. Do you even live
in the same world as these people? Five million dollars? Can you even
think of what that kind of money means? I mean, sure, to you it means
another jet so you can go galavanting around the world but do you ever
think about the people that you’re flying over?’ ‘Shut up man, I’ve got
serious stuff to worry about, I don’t need to hear your whining.’ I look
over towards the overflowing mountain of beer bottles. ‘Get some help,’
I say and walk out.

* * * * *

I’m walking through Harvard Square when my cell phone rings. ‘Jules
here,’ I say. ‘Alright man, we’ve discussed it and we’re willing to give
you 9 and a half.’ ‘With what vesting?’ I say. ‘5 in cash, 4 and a half
at three years quarterly.’ ‘Three years?’ I say. ‘How about two?’
‘Deal,’ they say. ‘Deal,’ I say. ‘We’ll fax over the papers tomorrow.’ I
snap the phone shut and keep on walking. It’s a beautiful day in
Cambridge. The sun streams down from overhead, casting a special glow on
the minstrels who inhabit the Square and making the colors pop on the
tight-fitting tanktops the coeds wear. Jugglers are tossing rings on my
right. ‘Change please?’ calls a hunched over black man on my left, with
his battered Starbucks cup extended. I keep on walking but he leaves his
perch and starts following me.

‘Hey man, can you spare some change? Anything? Please, I need to eat,’
he says. I keep walking, but I can’t shake him. He gets in front of me,
starts pushing up in my face. ‘Hey man, I see what you’re wearing. Look
here — I got myself a total of three bucks, fifty-seven cents. What do
you have?’ ‘Huh?’ I say. ‘How much money do you have?’ I stop walking
for a second. The man looks up in my face. ‘I said I got three bucks and
how much do you have?’ he repeats. ‘Five,’ I stammer, and then it hits
me. I crumple to the ground and start sobbing.

‘I can’t take it,’ I sob. ‘I’m not cut out for this world. I don’t want
to be in this world. I don’t want to be this person. I don’t want to be
*me*.’ I curl into a ball and start sobbing.

The man with the Starbucks cup backs away and heads back to his perch.
And the rest of the sidewalk traffic just keeps on moving, ignoring the
sobbing millionaire, lying in the middle of the street.
