Capital and its Complements: A Summary
======================================

June 30, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/comcap)

* * * * *

*The following is a non-technical summary of Brad DeLong’s May 2008
paper [Capital and Its
Complements](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/2008_pdf/20080521_capital.pdf).*

Adam Smith explained that in all countries with “security of property
and tolerable administration of justice” citizens would spend all their
money (capital), either on consumption or investment, causing the
country’s economy to grow. After some contention, later economic studies
tended to bare this out: a shortage of capital wasn’t always the
bottleneck, but when it was, removing it could lead to extraordinarily
rapid growth.

The problem for poor countries is that, because of high mortality rates
(which require more children to have some survive) and low educational
levels (which mean those children can find productive employment
quickly), they have high population growth and thus low capital-to-labor
ratios. Worse, trade allows you to spend your money buying manufactured
goods from overseas, for which you have only your very cheap labor to
provide in return. The result is that it requires an enormous amount of
domestic investment to improve capital-to-labor ratios.

And so rich country economists made “the neoliberal bet” on behalf of
poor countries: they hoped that loosening restrictions on international
capital flows would send capital rushing in to poor countries and build
their economies, the same way that Great Britain’s massive investment in
a young United States (in 1913 Britain’s foreign assets equaled 60% of
its domestic capital stock) built up that country.

But what ended up happening was exactly the opposite. Yes, NAFTA led US
companies to invest the \$20 to \$30 billion a year on manufacturing in
Mexico that its boosters predicted, but that investment was more than
outweighed by the \$30 to \$40 billion a year fleeing the country from
Mexico’s wealthy wanting to invest it in the United States. Why? In part
because the US was more politically stable, and thus a safer investment
climate. And in part because the US treats its own workers so poorly —
with productivity rising 35% since 2000 while real wages remain flat —
it provides an excellent investment opportunity.

But meanwhile, all this investment in the US was dwarfed by the Chinese
acquisition of our debt (and thus the political risk it represents).
China needed to do this, since US purchase of their exports is the only
thing funding the manufacturing-led industrialization of a massive
portion of their economy; there would be massive dislocation if that
funding dried up.

“Recognition of these facts came slowly.” First, Larry Summers said it
was our unsustainable current account deficit. (That was the 1990s;
today that deficit is four times as large.) Later, economists thought it
must have been our large budget deficits. Then they began thinking it
was the run-up in housing prices. But that, it is now clear to most
economists, was the result of a bubble. And yet the flow of capital to
the US continues. But, perhaps even more frighteningly, it could stop at
any moment.
