Museums and Exploratoriums
==========================

December 21, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfulmuseums)

* * * * *

The San Francisco Exploratorium is widely regarded as one of the finest
hands-on museums in the world. There are spinoffs in the San Francisco
airport and [a Klutz book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1878257145). Like
Richard Feynman, the museum has become something of a touchstone of
rightness for the science-minded community.

The Exploratorium is no doubt a fine museum, as far as such things go,
but like all museums, it is deeply flawed. Like most media of American
education, museums are hugely ineffective edifices.

The museum presents a golden opportunity to teach. You have a crowd that
is explicitly seeking out knowledge, coming to you in person, giving you
a large chunk of their time, and accompanied by their friends and
family. It is hard to imagine a more ideal setting for education. And
yet, this golden chance is squandered by boring exhibit designs.

Many museums simply present nominally educational things, like pieces of
art or natural specimens of science, with a couple sentences of
explanation. It is not clear what one is actually supposed to learn from
this and in practice the answer seems to be: not much.

Science museums take things another step by showing actual examples of
physical principles, and the Exploratorium goes a step further by
letting the kids control them. But in my experience although there were
many interesting principles on display, there was little learning. Each
exhibit has been regarded as a little toy, to be pushed and prodded
until you get bored and move on to something else.

It’s not the visitor’s fault: the exhibit makes the principle at work
less than clear and even if someone was interested in reading the
accompanying text, it rarely says much more than the name of the
phenomenon; no actual explanation is provided.

Museums have infuriated me on this front since I visited them as a
little kid. I remember drawing up plans for a genuinely educational
museum, and although I was extremely young at the time, the general
principles still seem sound: split people up into groups, have them try
to solve real problems, encourage them to sit and engage with something
over time instead of flitting from exhibit to exhibit, make it just as
rewarding for adults as well as kids. (My more specific ideas from that
period, involving floating chairs going down rear-projection tunnels,
seem a little sillier.)

But even in the multi-exhibit model used by the Exploratorium there is
much that could be improved. The exhibits could use what Tufte calls
“small multiples” to give kids a physical intuition about a phenomenon
by letting them change the relevant variables, rather than just showing
them one case. The descriptions could give the force vectors and
equations for each examples instead of just the name. Some of it might
go over kids heads, but even just getting them accustomed to such things
is a valuable skill.

Museums, [like lectures](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfullectures),
seem to be one of those things that are simply taken for granted as a
necessary part of being cultured. Cities have to have them, citizens
have to visit them. Everybody involved feels virtuous about the
enterprise and nobody ever asks if anything is being learned.
