2007 Review of Projects
=======================

January 2, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/projects2007)

* * * * *

[In August](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/interruptdriven) I noted that
I had taken on an enormous number of projects and did not suspect they
would all succeed. (It has since been pointed out to me that one of the
secrets of successful people is that they try a lot of projects and then
you only see the successes. So perhaps this is not as bad a strategy as
I initially thought.) Now that the year has come to a close, I thought I
would review the projects I mentioned there and see how they were doing.

[Open Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/): Moderate success. Open
Library has a team of six or so people working on it. It’s not
progressing as quickly as I would like, but it is progressing. The demo
site has launched and there are no big hurdles in our path. Personally,
I’ve learned an enormous amount about managing projects.

Memoir: Failed. At the end of last year, I planned to start this year to
take a week to write a memoir of life at Reddit. The writing proceeded
on schedule but towards the middle of the week I fell terribly ill,
realized I would not be happy with the resulting book, and reluctantly
abandoned it. Why did it fail? There were lots of mid-level reasons (I’m
not that interesting a subject, my memory of the period was poor, I was
doing it with impure motives) but the fundamental one was that I just
did not honestly believe a memoir of my time at Reddit was a book that
was worth reading. I only lost a couple days, so this was not a
devastating failure.

Psychology book: On hold. After the Reddit book, I begun researching and
outlining a book about the highlights of psychology. I am still
interested in this book and think about it a fair amount, but I put the
project on hold after I started work on Open Library.

Another book: Unknown. In the other post I said I was working on three
books. I can’t remember what the third one is now. I think about
different books a lot but I don’t think I’ve pursued any others very
seriously.

Consult on Berkeley [Big Ideas](http://bigideas.berkeley.edu/): Failed.
I had no big ideas for helping this project and I did not follow through
on finding any. I had made no strong commitments, so I do not consider
this a serious failure.

[JobBook](http://www.blog.sethroberts.net/2007/10/30/jobbookorg-up-and-running/):
Intermediate. An initial site is launched but I have not spent a lot of
time on it nor is it progressing rapidly. Other people are pursuing it,
though, so I feel less pressure.

[Science That Matters](http://sciencethatmatters.com/): Intermediate.
This site has launched and a fair number of posts have been written, but
it hasn’t been updated in a while and nobody else has really joined
seriously. But the site hasn’t been officially abandoned, so it’s not a
total failure.

[Jottit](http://jottit.com/?partner=aaronsw): Moderate success. The site
was finished and launched and got incredibly positive reviews but hasn’t
really caught fire with traffic yet. Perhaps this is because it’s a
great product that no one wants to use or perhaps we simply haven’t
figured out how to market it yet. (If you want to try to market it,
contact [me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).)

Statful: Intermediate. This was a project I mentored for Summer of Code
to allow for better web stats visualization. I was a fairly bad mentor,
in retrospect. A fair amount of the coding got done for this project but
I did not have a clear design in place ahead of time so the software is
not especially usable. If any readers want to help work on the design
for a free software web stats analyzer (you know, something that will
tell you who’s visiting your site) please email
[me@aaronsw.com](mailto:me@aaronsw.com). I still think the project is
finishable but it certainly has languished for a while.

[Seddit](http://seddit.revision1.net/): Failure. This was the other
Summer of Code project. The code got written but not tested or launched
and has since languished. The schedule budgeted time for launching the
project but apparently not enough. I think the lesson here is that in
such projects launching should be done first and features added later,
so that whatever results is usable. Also, I should be a better mentor.

Gmail clone: Failure. I got a couple of people started working on this
project but I didn’t follow through because I felt too overloaded.
However, people have since pointed me to
[Posterity](http://posterity.edgewall.org/) and
[Sup](http://sup.rubyforge.org/). Again, the consequences weren’t too
bad. I wasted some people’s time, but not an enormous amount.

Book reader: Intermediate. I finished 70% of this but never launched it.
Just never got around to it. The same was true of a number of other web
projects.

[Journalism](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/writings): Success. I had two
articles published for money and a third is on its way to the editor.

[Paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/whowriteswikipedia/): Intermediate.
Plagued by difficulties, the paper has been teetering on the brink of
failure for another year. I think a big problem was not having a partner
who had enough time to push me about it more.

[Novel](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity): Intermediate. I had
to stop working on the novel when I got sick but I mostly did it on time
when I was OK and a shocking number of people seemed to actually read
it. I will try to finish it early this year.

All in all, I think it was a fairly mixed year project-wise. A couple
minor failures, a couple minor successes, and a couple big projects
where time will tell. In truth, it may be too soon to evaluate this
year. If Open Library becomes a big success, this year will have been
well worthwhile. Otherwise, its legacy will be more mixed.
