Eat and Code
============

August 2, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/eatandcode)

* * * * *

Dear Diary: Sorry I haven’t written so long. Running a startup is
*hard*! That and finally having people to talk to sort of takes some of
the time and desire out of writing. I’m thinking maybe instead of a full
blow-by-blow account of what happened, I’ll write posts about different
topics, that will recap the story so far. My first attempt follows. -ASw

Life seems so incredibly overworked and overcomplicated that you pare it
down to the bare essentials: eat and code. Surely you should be able to
handle this without distraction. Unfortunately, it’s not so easy.

* * * * *

Let’s take eating.

To be honest, I’ve always had a problematic relationship with food. I
always liked plain things — the year before college I lived mostly off
of eating plain, microwaved bagels. At oriental restaurants I would
always just order steamed white rice. Wes Felter, noting I would
apparently only eat white food joked, referencing a Science Fiction
novel, that I would eat light bulbs, but “only the white ones”. This
reached its extremes at a World Wide Web conference where all the food
was white, even the plate it was on. Tim Berners-Lee later pulled my
mother aside to share his concerns about this diet.

Finally, one day at an oriental restaurant by Stanford (years before I
went to school there), we had the typical discussion except this time
Cory Doctorow spoke up: ‘are you sure you’re not a supertaster?’ he
asked. I had heard the They Might Be Giants song but never considered
the possibility. I thought about it as the conversation continued and it
seemed to make sense to me. [At this point I imagine a crane shot
lifting up and up over the conversation at the restaurant. Fade to:] I
did some research on the Internet and did the test (which formally
consists of putting blue food coloring on your tongue, taking a piece of
paper with a three-hole punch, placing it over the tongue and counting
the number of taste buds in it) and indeed, I am a supertaster. This
hasn’t eliminated the discussions about my eating habits, but it does
shift the blame.

In any event, I’m not one for the fine arts of cooking. So it’s always
seemed attractive to me to have a simple food that tastes decent that I
can just pull out and eat whenever I want. And, lo, it appeared that I
had found it: Cheerios. Cheerios claimed on the box to be healthy, they
had little in the way of taste, I could eat them whenever I want, they
had big boxes of them at the corner grocery store — everything seemed
great. Cheerio boxes piled up in the corner. (Photo to follow.)

There were some problems, though. I didn’t eat them with water or milk,
which meant that a fine Cheerio dust went everywhere. This dust was so
fine that it got into invisible cracks in my laptop’s surface and
apparently bonded with the metal and had to be scraped out each time I
ate. And then I begun to discover that the Cheerio dust was also into my
system, possibly even my lungs and giving me some Cheerio form of
silicosis; they made it difficult to breathe deeply. ‘Wouldn’t it be
ironic if I died of pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis?’ I
asked Simon. (I chose pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis as a
spelling word in 6th grade.)

At the same time, I was suffering from bouts of acid reflux which
continued to grow in frequency and severity. First just some acid. Then,
one night walking back from a Noam Chomsky lecture, I began to cough of
what felt like my stomach lining. I gave up the Cheerios but it didn’t
help. Last night I threw up my entire dinner.

And then what do I eat instead? We go for regular meals at 12 and 6 but
I’m only sporadically hungry and the food is getting boring. In Science
Fiction stories, we imagine small packets of food that are healthy but
taste like whatever we enjoy. Forget that, I’d be happy with just
packets of food that are healthy. I’m sick of having to worry about
food.

* * * * *

And then there’s programming. When I’m feeling good, I’ll have bouts of
just amazing productivity, doing everything that needs to be done in
hours. The only problem is that these good days are followed by a week
of bad ones, where I feel tired or depressed or scared and can’t quite
force myself to sit and face the code.

I used to think this was just cowardice, that I just needed to sit down
and program and I’d get the same level of productivity again. But what
if this is some serious limit in my brain? What if programming takes so
much out of me that it takes days to recharge? I’ve never seriously
considered this possibility before, but it’s not just fatalism — it has
real implications for how I should structure my days.

The last time I was fighting procrastination I was watching a bunch of
good television shows. And as part of this, I would read Tim Goodman,
the Roger Ebert of television critics. I was struck to learn one day
that even Tim Goodman, whose job was to literally sit down and watch TV,
could not bring himself to accomplish this task. I mean, I knew all
about [Structured
Procrastination](http://www-csli.stanford.edu/~john/procrastination.html)
but surely it had its limits. How could someone procrastinate sitting
down and watching TV? And yet, here it was before my eyes — my favorite
television critic, a hardworking and thoughtful man who had even spent a
column answering a question I sent him, even though I lived in Chicago
at the time.

The lesson I drew from this is that the human mind is such that whatever
you do, it will try to avoid it. So you might as well aim high. Now the
question is: what do you do with the rest of time?
