Fat Backlash
============

May 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatbacklash)

* * * * *

*They told me exercise and diet\
 If I would try it, would cure my ills\
 But though I’m already past my quota\
 I want another load o’ those magic pills*\
 — They Might Be Giants, “[Renew My
Subscription](http://www.tmbw.net/wiki/index.php/Renew_My_Subscription)”

The response to [my suggestion that there might be a simple and painless
way to lose weight](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet) brought
some interesting responses. Many people who wrote in were excited about
it or were actually trying it. But some of the rest were downright
hostile.

tuomov wrote:

> No pain, no loss. Forget all these bullshit weight-loss manuals. Those
> four words above summarise all that you need to know. The rest is just
> pain management and scheduling. If you don’t feel hungry occasionally,
> you’re not losing weight.

And Martijn commented:

> But how is this healthy? This diet sounds like a trick to fool your
> body. […] Why not just eat well? […] Somehow people want to lose
> weight the easy way, pff.. just prooves how lazy this ‘McDonalds’
> generation has become.

Such comments strike me as slightly odd. “Eat better” has been the diet
advice for as long as I can remember and undoubtedly everyone overweight
has heard it by now. And yet, as these writers clearly know, obesity is,
as I understand it, an epidemic in this country. So this supposed
solution clearly isn’t working. Yes, it might work in the sense that if
everyone followed it they’d be fine (although even that is somewhat
unclear), but plainly it’s too hard to follow. If our goal is to
actually stop obesity, then we’re failing.

But I suspect for some people, that isn’t the goal. And Martijn’s last
sentence hints at this. In [my last
piece](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture) I drew an analogy
between being poor and being fat. And I think this rage at an easy way
to lose weight parallels the rage we see at “government handouts” that
provide an “easy way out” of being poor.

(To be clear, I’m talking about people who are opposed to easy ways to
lose weight in general; not the people who were skeptical about this
diet in particular or sick of fad diets altogether. Such reactions are
perfectly right and reasonable.)

This is one thing I didn’t really predict in my last piece on the
subject, but undoubtedly such far-reaching changes will also have their
backlash. People who have spent their whole lives putting themselves
through the pain of starvation and strenuous exercise to maintain their
physique are undoubtedly going to be a little upset to figure out it was
all unnecessary. It would be bad enough if it was some new invention
that made fat disappear — after all, it hadn’t been invented yet when
they’d gone through all that so there was no way they could take
advantage of it. But olive oil and sugar water? That’s been around
forever! How could they have missed it?

Ronald Reagan got elected campaigning against imaginary “welfare queens”
in supposed-Cadillacs. Will right-wing politicians of the future rail
against those who take the easy way out of being fat?

One major difference is that economics is at least thought to be a
zero-sum game. Those welfare queens are taking “*your money*”, in the
form of taxes. But you lose nothing if more people get thin. By the same
token, there’s not a whole lot the government can do about this problem.
The welfare payments were theirs, so they could cut them (as Clinton
savagely did) but what’s the government going to do about the diet? Ban
olive oil?

Perhaps instead we’ll see social pressure. The major visible difference
between someone on the diet and someone who isn’t (considering that the
olive oil can be taken in private) is that someone who’s on the diet
simply doesn’t eat much. But eating is a major social function, around
which much business and friendship is conducted. Perhaps backlash
members will heap scorn on those who skip lunch or eat little, perhaps
even ostracizing them until they start eating like normal (and thus
weakening the effects of the diet).

I’ve seen a little bit of this myself — as a supertaster, my tastes are
sufficiently strange that when eating with new people I’m often asked
about my choice of food and then queried and lightly mocked for my
explanation. It’s not so bad and I’m sure people mean perfectly well by
it, but it is a cost and if people are actually angry about the diet, it
may get worse.

So while actually being fat may go away easily, the stigma might be a
little harder to erase.
