The Real Problem with *Waiting for “Superman”*
==============================================

October 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/waitingforsuperman)

* * * * *

[[crossposted at
HuffPo](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/aaron-swartz/the-real-problem-with-wai_b_748748.html)]

*Waiting for “Superman”*, in case you haven’t heard, is the hot new film
from *Inconvenient Truth* director Davis Guggenheim. While his last film
capitalized on liberal guilt over destroying our planet (and maybe
voting for Ralph Nader?), *“Superman”* (yes, the film is weirdly
insistent on those unnecessary quotation marks) is for people who feel
bad about sending their kids to private school while poor kids wallow in
the slums.

“Teaching should be easy,” Guggenheim declares as we watch a cartoon
teacher rip open his students’ skulls and pour what looks like blue
Spaghetti-O’s inside. (When he closes the skulls the kids sprout wings
and fly out the open classroom window.) This is about as close as the
film gets to depicting actual teaching. (I checked with the friend who
paid for my ticket and he confirmed this scene was meant seriously,
though thankfully not literally.)

Despite repeatedly insisting poor kids just need better teachers, the
film never says what it is that better teachers actually do. Instead it
highlights the voices of American Express pitchman Geoffrey Canada and
Bill Gates, whose obsessions with higher standardized test scores have
led their schools to cancel recess and art in favor of more hours of
scripted memorization. Why bother with art if teaching is just about
filling kids’ heads with pre-determined facts?

The real crisis in American education isn’t teachers’ unions preventing
incompetent teachers from getting fired (as awful as that may be), it’s
the single-minded focus on standardized test scores that underlies
everything from Bush’s No Child Left Behind to Obama’s Race to the Top
to the charter schools lionized in the film. Real education is about
genuine understanding and the ability to figure things out on your own;
not about making sure every 7th grader has memorized all the facts some
bureaucrats have put in the 7th grade curriculum.

This would be obvious if the film dared to show real teaching in the
schools it lauds. Instead of the rich engagement you imagine from
progressive private schools, you find teachers who read from assigned
scripts while enforcing a regime of zero-tolerance discipline. They’re
nightmarish gulags where children’s innate creativity is beaten out of
them and replaced with martial order. Because standardized behavior is
what makes you do well on standardized tests.

Film is the perfect medium for showing what this life is like. Seeing
terrified kids up on the big screen, you can’t help but empathize with
them. So we never see it. Instead, the film hides behind charts and
graphs and interviews. “When you see a great teacher, you are seeing a
work of art,” Geoffrey Canada tells us, but this is something Guggenheim
would rather tell than show.

The film has other flaws. It insists all of America’s problems would be
solved if only poor kids would memorize more: Pittsburgh is falling
apart not because of deindustrialization, but because its schools are
filled with bad teachers. American inequality isn’t caused by decades of
Reaganite tax cuts and deregulation, but because of too many failing
schools. Our trade deficit isn’t a result of structural economic factors
but simply because Chinese kids get a better education. Make no mistake,
I desperately want every kid to go to a school they love, but it seems
far-fetched to claim this would solve all our country’s other problems.
At the end of the day, we have an economy that works for the rich by
cheating the poor and unequal schools are the result of that, not the
cause.

I’m glad a talented filmmaker has decided to draw attention to the
horrible inequities in our nation’s schools. But I’m terrified that the
solutions put forth by its proponents will only make things worse. We
know what happens when we fire teachers who don’t do enough to raise
their students’ test scores, or when we adopt more stringent
requirements for classroom curriculum: we squeeze out what little
genuine education these schools have left. And that’s something we
should really feel guilty about.
