Disciplinary Bubbles
====================

October 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/disciplinarybubbles)

* * * * *

*Here’s another blog post that’s long overdue. There seems to be a surge
of interest in the topic lately, so I thought I’d write up my
longstanding thoughts.*

The academy is often thought of as the ideal for developing knowledge:
select the brightest minds in the country, guarantee them jobs, allow
them all the resources they need to research anything, don’t interfere
with any of their conclusions. On some issues, these independent-minded
academics form a consensus and we tend to give their consensus very
heavy weight. They can’t all be wrong, can they?

And yet, in my empirical research, I find they very often are. A short
blog post is no place to do a careful study, but I can mention some
examples. The classic works in industrial relations turn out to be
complete hoaxes, yet they’ve dominated the teach of the field for over
half a century. (See [Alex Carey’s
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/086840358X) for details.) In political
science, the most respected practioner’s most famous work shades and
distorts his own findings to support a theory wildly at odds with the
facts. (See [*Who Really
Rules?*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whoreallyrules)) The whole field
of fMRI studies are so flat-out ridiculous that journal articles are
even [making jokes about
them](http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2009/09/dead-salmon-responds-to-portra.html).
And, maybe most blatantly today, economics was dominated by a paradigm
that believed substantive unemployment was impossible, despite that
notion having been famously and thoroughly debunked by Keynes and, of
course, reality.

How is this possible? I think the key, as in most institutional studies,
is that of the filter. To become a professor of X, one must first spend
several years receiving an undergraduate major in X, then several more
years going to graduate school in X, then perhaps work as a postdoc or
adjunct for a bit, before getting a tenure-track position and working
like mad to make enough of a dent in the field of X to be seen as
deserving of a prominent permanent position. When your time is called, a
panel of existing professors of X passes judgment on your work to decide
if it passes muster. Can you imagine a better procedure for forcing
impressionable young minds to believe crazy things?

And so this process forms what I call disciplinary bubbles. Take the
case of industrial relations for a moment. The field was largely created
by the Rockefellers, who wanted research into how they could get rid of
their unions. They paid lavishly and, not surprisingly, found people who
told them what they wanted to hear: that treating workers nicely made
unions unnecessary and companies more efficient. The studies were
completely bogus but the people who conducted them were hailed as
heroes, and provided with lavish funding to continue their research. The
funding started new departments which trained new proteges, each of whom
was taught that the founding studies as gospel. They were told to work
on expanding and refining the results, not results, not questioning
then, and so they did, becoming industrial relations professors in their
own right and continuing the cycle.

Like other bubbles, disciplinary bubbles are difficult to pop. Imagine
you do research outside their incorrect assumptions. Your research will
simply be marginalized and ignored — you don’t get into the conferences
or the journals, it’s just not seen as valid work. And even if you try
to disprove the bogus assumptions, you get ignored. Everyone already in
the field has built their careers on those assumptions. They’ve long
rationalized them to themselves; nobody is going to support someone who
argues their life’s work is built on sand.

Thus ignorance marches on.
