The Genius is in the Details
============================

December 4, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/smartabstractions)

* * * * *

As best as we can tell, the human brain works by mastering a specific
thing and then “giving it a name”, wrapping the whole thing up into a
bundle and pushing it down a level, so that things can then be built
with it as a component. You see this all over the place — it’s how
science works, it’s how you program, it’s even how people deal with
their friends (“let’s do the mall again”).

So it would seem natural to think that smart people would work on a very
high level, dealing not in details but in huge abstractions. They would
have turned everything into a component, no longer worrying about its
details, and built things out of the results.

Bizarrely, this seems entirely untrue. The smartest people I know
disdain abstractions, preferring to speak in concrete specifics. Take
Paul Buchheit, the genius behind Gmail. When he talks about building web
applications, he doesn’t think about high-level things like the
underlying semantic structure of the data — instead he talks about the
little “heads” that read data off of the hard disk and how fast they can
move.

Another friend, also incredibly bright, doesn’t refer to other people
that way. He doesn’t say “oh, he’s an expert in X” or “he’s really smart
about X”; instead he says “he’s thought a lot about X” — breaking down
the abstractions of expertise and intelligence into something much more
concrete: spending time thinking about something.

At first glance these seem like mistakes. Why should a brilliant web app
programmer be thinking about hard disk heads? Isn’t that something
someone else should take care of? And why is my smart friend only
concerned with how much time someone has spent on something? Aren’t
there other factors involved?

But if you look the other direction, you see the same pattern. Clueless
business guys love speaking in big abstractions, talking about
“information superhighways” that act as “more efficient content delivery
systems” that will “monetize the genre” by “disintermediating the legacy
players”. These guys are speaking exactly as you would expect smart
people to — thinking at a high level, working with the big ideas — yet
the things they say are so incredibly stupid that they either don’t mean
anything or mean something that’s actually impossible.

So what’s going on here? As we noted at the beginning, the brain works
by mastering the details and *then* giving them a name. But the business
guys took the easy way out: they just mastered the names. If you asked
them exactly how a content delivery system worked, they wouldn’t be able
to tell you. They know only the high-level thing, with none of the
details.

And it’s the details that make it so interesting — and so powerful.
Anyone can master the names of big concepts and combine them like so
many puzzle pieces; it’s knowing how they work that takes time. And the
smart people have made that investment. So perhaps it’s just natural
that they want to stay it a little closer to it than most.
