The Politics of Wikis
=====================

December 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikianarchism)

* * * * *

Anarchism has a pretty bad rap. Put aside all the people who think it’s
about smashing windows and shooting presidents and just focus on the
idea (*an arch* — without rulers). If someone told you that you should
start a business where basically no one is in charge of anything and
everyone shares ownership of everything and all decisions are made by
consensus, you’d think they were a hopeless utopian about to get a large
dose of reality. Yet that’s pretty much what Wikipedia is.

There’s the obvious anarchism of wikis: namely, “anyone can edit”. No
intelligence tests or approval rules or even a temporary probation.
Anyone can just wander up and hit that edit button and get started.
Where in the world can a random person get a larger audience?

That’s pretty radical in itself, but things go much deeper. There’s no
ownership over text. If you write something, as soon as you post it to
Wikipedia, it’s no longer “yours” in any real sense. Others will modify
and mangle it without a second thought and anyone who quotes those words
in the future will attribute them to “Wikipedia” and not to you. In a
culture where directors are suing people for fastforwarding over the
smutty scenes in their movies, that’s pretty wild.

And while there are a few technical tricks to give some people more
software features than others, for the most part the Wikipedia community
is pretty flat. Every non-edit decision, from which pages get deleted to
what the logo in the corner is, gets made by consensus with everyone
getting a chance to have their say.

In real life, few people are willing to take such a radical stand. Even
the farthest reaches of the far left hold back from proposing such
extreme ideas, suggesting that not only that such extreme freedom
wouldn’t fly in a capitalist culture like ours, but that perhaps some of
these restrictions are just necessary because of human nature. But it’s
humans who edit Wikipedia, and mostly humans raised in capitalist
culture as well. Perhaps it’s time to give more extremism a chance.
