My Slate
========

September 16, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/slate2)

* * * * *

Well, it’s election day in Massachusetts. (If you don’t know what’s
going on, check out this actually quite nice website:
[wheredoivotema.com](http://www.wheredoivotema.com/)) And, since nobody
else seems to be, I thought I’d tell you who I’m voting for. (I live in
central Cambridge and will be voting in the Democratic primary, for what
it’s worth.)

**Senate:** Edward J. O’Reilly. Ed O’Reilly is against the war in Iraq,
supports single-payer health care, and actually wants to fight for
things in Washington. John Kerry lost to George W. Bush, is running on
his ability to earmark money for the state, and didn’t spend the last
ten million in his Presidential campaign so he could spend it on this
Senate race. (He claims he saved it for a Florida recount-type
situation, as if nobody would donate money to him if the election was
again hanging by a thread.) Kerry has an inspiring story; he came back
from Vietnam to work to end the war and entered Congress promising not
to send soldiers to another such battle. But he’s sold out, and that’s
exactly what he did.

**House (District 8):** Michael E. Capuano. I don’t know much about
Capuano, although he seems a reliable liberal vote, but he’s running
unopposed.

**Councillor (Sixth District):** Roseann Trifoni-Mazzuchelli. This was a
tough one. Councillors apparently mainly vet judicial nominations.
Roseann is an (admittedly somewhat crazy-seeming) outsider campaigning
on a platform of anti-corruption and tough-on-pedophiles. Personally, I
think we’re too tough on pedophiles, but I have to balance that on
wanting a fervent anti-corruptionist to shake things up. I ended up
going with Roseann.

**State Senate (1 Suffolk + Middlesex):** Anthony W. Petruccelli. I know
literally nothing about this guy, but (suprise!) he’s running unopposed.
(Geez, this is getting boring; maybe I should run against one of these
people.)

**State House (25 Middlesex):** Alice K. Wolf. Unopposed. Former mayor
of Cambridge, supporter of gay marriage, and took the NPAT, so she can’t
be all bad.

**Register of Probate (Middlesex):** I was going to just say “John R.
Buonomo”, because he’s running unopposed and honestly, it’s Register of
Probate, so who cares? but a quick Google search finds he’s been
suspended and is currently on trial for — get this — stealing thousands
of dollars in change from government xerox machines. So my first thought
is “Why is he still on the ballot?” and my second thought is “Who steals
thousands of dollars in change from xerox machines?” He has since
[resigned](http://www.boston.com/news/local/breaking_news/2008/09/lawyer_middlese_1.html)
to fight the charges, although
[apparently](http://wbztv.com/local/middlesex.county.register.2.812554.html)
they have surveillance footage.

On the other hand, the Probate Court’s website says it was paid for by
him personally, so maybe it was for a good cause. (Or at least it does
in the Google cache; the current version has been scrubbed of him.)

So, uh, I guess I write-in for Marie A. Gardin, who was sworn in as
interim register of probate. Or leave it blank? Ah, I see that the
papers and blogs are all endorsing [Tom
Concannon](http://www.wickedlocal.com/newton/news/x256654767/Former-Newton-mayor-runs-for-county-seat),
former mayor of Newton, who supports abolishing Register of Probate as
an elected office. Good enough for me.

Write in: “Thomas B. Concannon, 8 Bacon Rd., Newton” or [get a
sticker](http://blogs.townonline.com/newton/?p=33631).

*Update:* Voted without incident. Polls were pretty empty but the system
was extremely orderly.
