Making Noise: How Right-Wing Think Tanks Get the Word Out
=========================================================

June 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2)

* * * * *

*[This is part 2 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1).]*

Malkin’s book on internment was no more accurate than the corporate
misinformation about global warming. Historians quickly showed the book
badly distorted the government records and secret cables it purported to
describe. As just one example, Malkin writes that a Japanese message
stated they “had [Japanese] spies in the U.S. Army” when it actually
said they hoped to recruit spies in the
army.[†](http://hnn.us/articles/7092.html) But it should be no big
surprise that Malkin, who is, after all, an editorialist and not a
historian, didn’t manage to fully understand the complex documentary
record in the year she spent writing the book
part-time.[†](http://www.isthatlegal.org/Muller_and_Robinson_on_Malkin.html)

Malkin’s motives, as a right-wing activist and proponent of racial
profiling, are fairly obvious. But how did Mary Dombrowski, the
Bainbridge Island parent, get caught up in this latest attempt to
rewrite history? Opinions on global warming were changed because big
business could afford to spent millions to change people’s minds. But
racial profiling seems like less of a moneymaker. Who invested in
spreading that message?

The first step is getting the information out there. Dombrowski probably
heard about Malkin’s book from the Fox News Channel, where it was
ceaselessly promoted for days, and where Malkin is a contributor. Or
maybe she heard about it on MSNBC’s *Scarborough Country*, a show hosted
by a former Republican congressman, which had Malkin as a guest. Or
maybe she heard it while driving and listening to FOX host Sean
Hannity’s radio show, or maybe Rush Limbaugh’s. Or maybe she read a
review in the *New York Post* (which, like Fox News, is owned by Rupert
Murdoch). Or maybe she read about it on a right-wing website or weblog,
like Townhall.com, which publishes 10 new conservative op-ed columns
every day.

All of these organizations are partisan conservative outlets.
Townhall.com, for example, is published by the Heritage Foundation, a
right-wing Washington, D.C. think tank. Most people imagine a think tank
as a place where smart people think big thoughts, coming up with new
ideas for the government to use. But that’s not how Heritage works.
Nearly half of Heritage’s \$30 million budget is spent on publicity, not
research.[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/9607/heritage.html) Every day,
they take work like Malkin’s that agrees with their ideological
prejudices and push it out through the right-wing media described above
(Fox News, Rush Limbaugh, *New York Post*) and into the mainstream media
(ABC, NPR, *New York Times*, *Seattle Times*).

They use a variety of tactics. Heritage, for example, publishes an
annual telephone directory featuring thousands of conservative experts
and associated policy organizations. (*The Right Nation*, 161) And if
looking up somebody is too much work, Heritage maintains a 24-hour
hotline for the media, providing quotes promoting conservative ideology
on any subject. Heritage’s “information marketing” department makes
packages of colored index cards with pre-printed talking points for any
conservative who plans to do an interview. (*The Right Nation*, 167) And
Heritage computers are stocked with the names of over 3,500 journalists,
organized by specialty, who Heritage staffers personally call to make
sure they have all the latest conservative misinformation. Every
Heritage study is turned into a two-page summary which is then turned
into an op-ed piece which is then distributed to newspapers through the
Heritage Features Syndicate. (*What Liberal Media?*, 83)

It all adds up: a 2003 study by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, the
media watch group, found conservative think tanks were cited nearly
14,000 times in major newspapers, television, and radio shows. (By
comparison, liberal think tanks were cited only 4,000 times that
year.)[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/0405/think-tank.html) That means
10,000 additional quotes of right-wing ideology, misleading statistics,
distorted facts, and so on. There’s no way that doesn’t unfairly skew
the public debate.

*Next:* [Part 3: Endorsing Racism](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3)
