What Happens in *The Dark Knight Rises*
=======================================

July 29, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr)

* * * * *

*Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow.^[1](#fn:fnc)^*

The film begins by asking: what happens if conservative law-and-order
policies actually worked? The answer, we quickly learn, is that it
destroys the people behind them. Without anything to fight, Bruce Wayne
is just a reclusive withered husk, while Commissioner Gordon is actually
going to be fired. Given that these are two of the film’s most
sympathetic characters, we naturally tend to deplore this situation. And
so the film’s first key point: the champions of law-and-order do not
truly want to succeed at their stated mission.

In a world without (street) crime, the police become merely the
errand-boys for the wealthy, not bothering to refocus their efforts on
corporate or economic criminals (like Daggett). Gordon sighs at having
such quotidian assignments as tracking down wayward members of Congress;
meanwhile no one even considers punishing the same Congressman for
sexually harassing Selina Kyle. As a result, economic inequality grows
unchecked and Gotham’s citizens are saved from physical attack only to
suffer economic depredation (some literally moving into the sewers in
the desperate search for a job).

The whole thing is the mirror of the beginning of the first film, in
which Wayne’s Keynesian Supertrain project to boost the city’s economy
is felled by random street crime. Now the ending of street crime is
ultimately felled by the failure to create an economy that works for
all. ([Ra’s al
Ghul](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0372784/quotes?qt0469932): “Over the
ages, our weapons have grown more sophisticated. With Gotham, we tried a
new one: Economics. … Create enough hunger and everyone becomes a
criminal.”)

With the state having withered away to little more than a nightwatchman
for the wealthy, private charity is all that’s left to fill the widening
gap between the horribly poor and the terribly wealthy. But this is
ultimately a failure, because most of the wealthy philanthropists are
more concerned with their own self-image than actual impact. Worse,
those who are making a difference are forced to cancel their charitable
programs when the downturn (and questionable business decisions) cause
their profits to slump.

Into this Rawlsian nightmare walks Bane, a thug who escaped Middle
Eastern extraordinary rendition to train with Arab terrorists before
heading to Gotham. There he’s building an underground vanguard party,
constructing a new society literally underneath the decadent old one.

Bane’s activists crash the Gotham Stock Exchange (which is exactly like
the NYSE except with a gaudy ticker on the door), using their
proletarian roles (bike messenger, shoe shiner, cement mixer) to seize
control of the markets and expropriate the wealth of Bruce Wayne, the
city’s richest man. Having a real enemy revitalizes Wayne, leading him
to return to action as Batman and attempt to catch the criminals.

But with the Gordon Era on its way out, the police are more concerned
with stopping the vigilante Batman than the expropriators, letting them
get away. Thus just as Batman’s success in stopping crime made himself
unnecessary, his clumsy failure is what allows him to return.

The activists strike a tactical alliance with certain deluded members of
the capitalist class, using their expropriation to engineer a hostile
takeover of Wayne Enterprises, eventually allowing them (with a small
amount of violence) to take possession of a nuclear weapon.

That way, when the vanguardists use proletarian sabotage to secede and
declare independence, the US can’t intervene and instead leaves the
newly-independent city to its own devices.^[2](#fn:fp)^ (Once again,
Wayne has made it possible for his enemies to succeed — they never could
have done it without his nuke.) Bane quickly dismantles the repressive
state, releasing the prisoners locked up without parole under the harsh
law-and-order regime. In the resulting anarchy, the people quickly do
what the old establishment wouldn’t: string up the bankers (sometimes
literally) and redistribute their wealth. (Their show-trials are the
mirror to the establishment’s treatment of organized crime under the
Dent Act, harshly punishing the criminals and seizing their assets with
limited due process.)

Emphasizing that all power ultimately comes from the force of the fist,
the police try to reassert their control in a climactic street brawl
against Bane’s vanguardists. However, the situation only gets worse for
them as it’s revealed that Talia, the daughter of the Arab terrorist
leader, has arranged the nuke to detonate unavoidably.

Batman apparently finally realizes that he’s only creating the crime he
tries so hard to stop ([as The Joker told
him](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YPuToZT0vfY), “I don’t want to kill
you! What would I do without you?…you complete me”), so he fakes his own
death as he disposes of the bomb. He ends the film in Italy, apparently
leading a normal life with an attractive reformed
catburglar.^[3](#fn:fn1)^

As Neil Kandalgaonkar [notes in
comments](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr#c1):

> If Bruce Wayne had never used his resources to ‘improve’ matters,
> Gotham would be a thriving (albeit often corrupt) city. Instead it has
> suffered from terrorist attacks killing prominent city officials,
> destroying most bridges, devastating several public buildings, giant
> smoking holes in the ground, and even ruined the real estate value of
> the more desirable neighborhoods.
>
> The predictable result, not shown in the movie, is capital flight from
> a city which embraced law and order by any and all means, and instead
> got anarchy and ruin. The billionaire vigilante himself flees the
> city, having secured his fortune with offshore banking accounts.

* * * * *

1.  Thanks especially to [Aaron Bady’s
    review](http://thenewinquiry.com/blogs/zunguzungu/do-not-go-gentle-into-that-dark-knight/)
    for clarifying my thinking on some of these points. [↩](#fnref:fnc)

2.  Unlike with Cuba, Vietnam, Nicaragua, etc. [↩](#fnref:fp)

3.  Admittedly, this move is somewhat undercut by the fact that before
    he left he decided to set up a sequel series by sending a promising
    young cop (whose middle name turns out to be Robin) on a mission
    that ends with Robin watch a top policeman prefer to let the entire
    population of the city die rather than disobey outdated bureaucratic
    orders. Disgusted, Robin throws away his badge and sets off to
    continue Batman’s tactics of vigilantism, inheriting the
    Batcave. [↩](#fnref:fn1)


