Non-Hierarchical Management
===========================

February 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/management)

* * * * *

You want to get something done. But it’s too big to do it by yourself,
so you bring in some friends to help out. In your dreams, all your
friends just “click”, understand exactly what it is they’re all supposed
to do, and do it quickly and effective. In reality, this almost never
happens.

In order for any team to succeed, they need someone helping them all
stay on track — someone who we will call a “manager”.

The word manager makes many people uncomfortable. It calls up the image
of a bossman telling you what to do and forcing you to slave away at
doing it. That is not effective management.

A better way to think of a manager is as a servant, like an editor or a
personal assistant. Everyone wants to be effective; a manager’s job is
to do everything they can to make that happen. The ideal manager is
someone everyone would want to have.

Instead of the standard “org chart” with a CEO at the top and employees
growing down like roots, turn the whole thing upside down. Employees are
at the top — they’re the ones who actually get stuff done — and managers
are underneath them, helping them to be more effective. (The CEO, who
really does nothing, is of course at the bottom.)

Most guides on management are written for big bosses at big companies,
not people starting something new who want their team to be as effective
as possible. (Hi, startup founders!) So herewith, a guide to effective
non-hierarchical management.

Point 1: Management is a job.
-----------------------------

Management is not a typical job. People who manage programmers don’t
spend their day programming. Nor do they spend their day writing memos.
In fact, from the outside, it may appear like they don’t spend their day
doing very much at all. Don’t be fooled.

Management is a serious job. It is incredibly difficult and wildly
consuming. As an employee, if you miss a day off work, it’s no big deal:
some work doesn’t get done and you (or someone else) has to catch up on
it later. As a manager, it can become a serious problem — if you’re not
working, then the dozen people you serve aren’t working effectively as
well. It makes knocking off work to go to the fair a stressful
proposition.

On the other hand, it can be incredibly rewarding. If you do your job
right, you turn a group of individuals into a team, a group that’s more
effective than the sum of its parts. Together, you and your team can
achieve amazing things. As a manager, your task is to serve the team —
to make it as effective as it can possibly be, even if that means
stepping on the toes of a few individuals.

One incredibly popular misconception is that managers are just there to
provide “leadership” — you set everyone up, get them pointed in the
right direction, and then let them go while you go back to the “real”
stuff, whether it’s building things yourself, meeting with funders, or
going on the road and talking up your organization. Those are all
perfectly valid jobs, but they are not management. You have to pick one.
You cannot do both.

### Point 1a: Stay organized.

As the manager, it’s your job to make sure things get done. This means
you need a system for making sure things get done. This doesn’t have to
be anything fancy or complicated — a simple todo list will do — but
simply trying to remember or writing yourself a note is not a system.

One of the nice things about having a system is it actually makes you
less stressed out. Most people just keep their todo list somewhere in
the back of their head. As things pile up, they become harder and harder
to keep track of, and you become more stressed out about getting them
all done or forgetting about them.

Simply writing them down on a list makes everything seem more
manageable. You can see the things you have to do — really, there’s not
quite as many important ones as you thought — and you can put them in
order and get that nice burst of satisfaction that comes from crossing
them off.

Yes, it all sounds like silly, basic stuff, but it’s important. Just
having a list with all the stuff you need to do — and taking it
seriously, actually going down it and checking stuff off every single
day — is the difference between being a black hole of action items and
being someone who actually Gets Stuff Done.

Point 2: Know your team.
------------------------

As a servant, it’s crucial you know your masters well. You need to know
what they’re good at and what gives them trouble. You need to be able to
tell when they’re feeling good and when they’re in a rut. And you need
to have a safe enough relationship with them that they can be honest
with you and come to you when they’re in trouble. This is not easy. (You
have to be willing to hear bad news about yourself.)

The most important piece is understanding what people are good at and
what they like doing. A good first step is to just ask them, but often
people are wrong or don’t know. So you try giving them different things,
seeing how they do at them, and adjusting accordingly.

But in addition to your team’s professional skills, it’s important to
understand their personal goals. However much you may care about the
work, at bottom it’s still a job. You need to understand why your team
members took it. Was it because it seemed interesting? Because it seemed
worthwhile? Because it would give them valuable experience and help them
get a better job down the road? It’s important that you know, so you can
make sure your tasks and expectations are in line with their goals.

### Point 2a: Hire people smarter than you.

You want the best working for you. People who aren’t just good at their
job, but people who are also good at *your* job. People you can trust to
not just do something right but tell you that the way you suggested
doing it was wrong. People you can rely on to get things done if you
just stay out of their way. At least, that’s the ideal. In practice,
it’s hard to find people like that and even when you do, they still need
help.

I have never found the traditional methods of hiring — resumés,
interviews, quizzes — to be helpful at all. Instead, I look at two
things: what someone has done and whether I enjoy spending time with
them. The first shows not just their talent but also their ability to
execute. If they haven’t made something interesting, whether as a side
project or at a previous job, then they’re probably not worth hiring.
It’s not *that* hard to sit down and accomplish something; be wary of
people who haven’t.

Similarly, you need to keep in mind that you’re not just hiring a robot
— you’re hiring a flesh-and-blood human who you’re going to need to
spend a lot of time with during the day. That means they need to be
someone you not just get along with, but enjoy being around. A formal
interview, with all its stress and structure and contrivance, is a
pretty bad environment for seeing if you like someone. Instead, just go
get coffee and chat.

### Point 2b: Be careful when hiring friends.

Everyone wants to work with their friends. After all, you have so much
fun hanging out after work, why not hang out during work too? So they
recruit their friends to work with them. (Or, even worse, they recruit
their lovers.) But being friends is very different from being
colleagues. All friends learn ways to adjust themselves to each other —
which tones to use, which subjects to avoid, when to give each other
space.

These go out the window when you’re working together. You can’t just not
say things because they’ll get your friend upset. So you say them, and
they get upset, and you realize you have no way of dealing with each
other when you’re like this. It makes working together difficult, to say
the least.

The situation is the same, but vastly worse, with couples. Plus, you’re
really screwed when your relationship falls apart under the stress.

If you do decide to work with people you’re close with, you need to find
a way to put your other relationship “on hold” while you work together.
Which means you both need to be strong enough to be able to blow up at
each other at work and then go out for drinks like nothing ever
happened. If you can’t do this (and few can), then either give up on the
relationship or give up on the job.

The most extreme form of this, of course, is that you need to be able to
fire your friend. Just because you like them doesn’t mean they’ll
automatically be a good employee. And, sadly, there’s really no way for
you to know in advance. Bad employees are no less disastrous because
they’re your friends. Which means that if you hire a friend, you need to
be able to fire them.

### Point 2c: Set boundaries.

Conversely, don’t become close friends with the people you work with.
You have to set some personal boundaries: you’re their manager, not
their friend. Naturally, part of being a manager means that you have to
talk to people about their personal problems and possibly even offer
advice. After all, it’s your job to make your team effective and if
personal problems are distracting from that, you are going to have to
face someone’s personal problems.

But be sure to keep these problems at arm’s length. Actually getting
involved in someone’s personal life or otherwise establishing a close
personal relationship them is asking for trouble.

Point 3: Go over the goals together.
------------------------------------

Your first job as a manager is to make sure everyone’s on the same page.
The team needs to understand what they’re expected to do, why they’re
doing it, and who else is involved (funding it, using it, counting on
it). If you picked a good team (point 2a), they’ll hear this and find
holes in your plan and catch things you hadn’t thought of. (Which is
good! Together, you can fix it.)

But real work can’t begin until everyone’s on board with the plan.

### Point 3a: Build a community.

You’re not managing a bunch of individual employees; you’re managing a
team. You’re all trying to accomplish the same goal. It’s the manager’s
job to make sure everyone’s comfortable with each other. (Hint: Those
dumb break-the-ice games do not make people *more* comfortable.) And
while there’s obviously a lot of feedback you need to give people
one-on-one (*never* chew people out in front of a group), you should try
to do a lot in front of the team as well.

It’s easy to fall into a trap where you’re just giving feedback
individually. The result is that everyone feels isolated, not knowing
where their work fits in to the bigger picture. Providing opportunities
for everyone to see what everyone else is up to is crucial to making
your team actually feel like it’s a community, instead of just a group
of your friends. (First law of friendship drift: Just because you like
two people doesn’t mean they’ll automatically like each other.)

It’s also a good opportunity to set a tone. You want people to treat
each other like friends and colleagues, not backstabbing assholes or
bickering siblings. As my friend Clay comments:

> I have a “no asshole rule” which is really simple: I really don’t want
> to work with assholes. So if you’re an asshole and you work on my
> team, I’m going to fire you. Now, if the whole team says “gosh, that’s
> awful. We want to work with as many assholes as we can!” then we have
> a simple solution. I’ll fire me! (FYI: The “No Asshole Rule” is a
> book. I thought it was actually a pretty good book as far as Business
> books go. As far as I’m concerned, anybody could stand to read 100
> pages giving them the MBA Book cover they need to say to their boss:
> let’s get the assholes out of here.)

But a community is about more than just tone, there’s process as well.
You need to figure out how your team members work and how you can get
them to work together. Some people like constant human feedback; others
like locking themselves in a room for a couple hours and just getting
something done. Everyone has their own habits and styles. Your job is to
find an appropriate mix that makes everyone as productive they can be.

Point 4: Assign responsibility.
-------------------------------

First, break the plan up into parts. Make sure everybody understands the
parts.

Second, find a team member who wants to do each part. The key word here
is *wants* — some things just have to get done, it’s true, but things
will get done much better by people who want to do them.

One of the weird facts of life is that for just about everything you
hate doing, there is someone out there who loves doing it. (There are
even people who get a real kick out of cleaning toilets.) You may not
currently employ them and you may not be able to hire them, but the is
the goal worth striving toward.

It’s also important to realize that a lot of what makes a task
attractive or unattractive is outside the task itself. Managing the
company’s accounting books at first seems like a pretty uninteresting
job. But when you realize it makes you indispensable and gives you
authority over how all the money is spent, it suddenly seems a little
more exciting. Use your knowledge from point 2 to structure tasks in a
way that’s attractive to your team members.

### Point 4a: Vary responsibilities.

Another thing to keep in mind is that most people like variety in their
work. It’s very tempting to think of someone as “the finance guy” and
just give them all the finance-related tasks. But in any organization
there’s lots of different kinds of things to do and a wide mix of people
to do it. Many people will appreciate the opportunity to switch up the
kinds of things they do.

It’s tempting to think that this is inefficient, that by having one guy
do all the finance tasks they’ll become an expert in it and the finance
tasks will get done more effectively. And there’s definitely some truth
in it. But one of the best ways to be inefficient is to make your team
unhappy. If doing something new makes someone enjoy their job more,
it’ll be well worth the cost in time of them having to learn how to do
it.

Even better, their fresh perspective might just help you make
improvements you’d never thought of before.

### Point 4b: Delegate responsibility.

As the manager, it’s a continual temptation to keep important jobs for
yourself. After all, they’re usually fun to do and doggone-it they’re
*important*, you can’t risk them on somebody else! Resist the
temptation.

For one thing, taking jobs for yourself is one way of distracting
yourself from having to do actual management (point 1). But more
importantly, you’ll never be able to develop your team if you keep all
the real responsibility for yourself. Sure, Jony may not be as good at
meeting funders as you, but a lot of that’s because she’s never gotten a
chance to practice. If it’s something she wants to do (point 2), take
her along and give him a chance to learn.

Point 5: Clear obstacles.
-------------------------

This is the bulk of what non-hierarchical management is about. You’ve
got good people, they’ve got good responsibilities. Now it’s your job to
do everything in your power to help them get them done.

A good way to start is just by asking people what they need. Is their
office too noisy? Did they get confused about something you said? Are
they stuck on a particular problem? Are they overwhelmed with work? It’s
your job to help them out: get them a quieter office, clarify things,
find them advice or answers, shift some stuff off their plate. They
shouldn’t be wasting time with things that annoy them; that’s your job.

But you have to be proactive as well. People tend to suffer quietly,
both because they don’t want to come whining to you and just because
when you’re stuck in a rut all your attention is focused on the rut. A
key part of being a manager is checking in with people, pointing out
that they’re stuck in a rut, and gently helping them out.

### Point 5a: Prioritize.

At any given time, there’s lots of stuff that needs to be done. Part of
your job is helping people decide what to tackle first. You don’t want
to be *too* didactic about it — people like choice and variety, they’re
not always so happy when you just give them one instruction after
another — but even that’s usually far preferable to being overwhelmed
with stuff.

The best prioritization relationship is a dialogue: “OK, what’s next?”
someone asks. “Well, what about building the new sprocket management
engine?” “Ugh, I’m too tired for that today.” “OK, how about cleaning
the frobnitz?” “Bo-ring.” “Oh, I know! We need someone to document the
doohickey.” “Ooh, perfect — thanks!”

### Point 5b: Fight procrastination.

Procrastination is the crop blight of the office-work world. It affects
just about everyone and it’s very hard to fight alone. The single best
way to stop procrastination is to sit down with someone and come up with
the next concrete step they have to take and then start doing it
together. There’s something magical about having another person sit down
with you and do something that can overcome procrastination’s natural
resistance. And once you get someone started, momentum can often carry
them through the rest of the day.

Even if all you do is help people overcome procrastination, you will be
well worth it.

Point 6: Give feedback.
-----------------------

White-collar work is lonely. You sit at a desk, staring at a screen,
poking at buttons. It’s easy to get lost and off-track and depressed.
That’s why it’s important to check in and see how things are doing. Not
only does it give you a chance to see how people are doing (point 5), it
gives you a chance to see how things are coming and gently steer them
back on course if they’ve drifted from what you’ve intended.

### Point 6a: Don’t micromanage.

Remember, your job isn’t to tell people *how* to do things; it’s to help
them get it done. Sometimes this means helping them figure out how to do
it, but in general you should assume that you work with smart people and
they’ll be able to handle it themselves. Again, be a servant, not a
boss.

Studies consistently show that people are much happier and more
productive when they have control over the way they work. Never take
that away.

Point 7: Don’t make decisions (unless you *really* have to).
------------------------------------------------------------

As manager, people will often come to you to make decisions or resolve
disputes. It’s very tempting, with people looking up at you for
guidance, to want to give your sage advice. But the fact is, even if (or
especially if) as a manager you’re held up on a pedestal, you probably
know less about the question than anyone else on the team.

The worst managers don’t just make decisions when people come to them,
they parachute in and start dictating tiny details. The urge to do this
can be overwhelming, but there are few things more disastrous to morale.
If you really have to give input, couch it as such. And if people fight
back, know when to step back and say “look, you’re the expert. I was
just giving my two cents.” (Hint: It’s right after they start fighting
back.)

The best managers use these opportunities not to dictate an answer, but
to have a Socratic dialogue to help figure out what the best answer is.
Often when people are stuck on something, they really just need someone
else to talk things over with, either for assistance or validation.
Here’s your chance to help.

Point 8: Fire ineffective people.
---------------------------------

Firing people is hard. It’s probably the hardest thing you’ll ever do.
People go to absurd lengths to try and make it easier (“we’ll just try
him out for a month and see how it goes” is a common one) but they never
really help. You just have to bite the bullet and let people go. It’s
your job. If you can’t do it, find someone else.

Firing people isn’t just about saving money, or petty things like that.
It’s the difference between a great organization and a failure.
Inefective people drag everyone else down to their level. They make it
so that you can’t take pride in what you’re doing, so that you dread
going into work in the morning, so that you can’t rely on the other
pieces of the project getting done. And assholes, no matter how talented
they may be, are even worse. Conversely, there are few things more fun
than working hard with a really nice, talented group of people.

You are never going to be able to tell whether someone is going to work
out in advance. Assholes are sometimes easy to spot, but people can have
great resumes, solid references, a charming interview style, and still
be total failures. And the worst part is, there will always be excuses
for their failures. “I know, I know,” they’ll say, “it’s just that I’ve
been really sick this week. I’ve been distracted with family things.
I’ve been traveling. Look, I’m sorry. I promise I’ll do better this
week.” I’ve said them all myself.

If you’re not getting things done, you can always come up with excuses
for why. Competent people get things done anyway. Ineffective ones let
the excuses pile up. They’re not going to leave themselves. You have to
pull the trigger.

Point 9: Give away the credit.
------------------------------

As the team’s manager, there will be many opportunities where people
will want to give you credit. And getting credit is nice, it makes you
feel good. So you start coming up with excuses for why you deserve it,
even though you didn’t do any of the work. “Well, it was my vision,” you
will say. “I was the one who made it all happen.”

But think of all those talented people slaving away at desks. They were
the ones who actually made it happen. Make sure they get the credit. And
not in a facetious, “thanks to all the little people way”. No, you need
to own up. You are the assistant. They did all the work. As Clay says,
“A manager’s worst enemy is his or her own ego.”

Point 10: You’re probably not cut out for this.
-----------------------------------------------

Spending your days doing grunt work for people who are smarter than you.
Obsessing over their mood and personal problems. Turning down all
opportunities to take credit or get attention so you can continue to
work as a servant. Does this really sound like a job you want?

Probably not. Few people are cut out for it. It’s really hard. It’s
incredibly stressful. It’s not at all glamorous.

But it’s vitally important. A team without a manager is doomed to be an
ineffective team. So if you can’t do it, find somebody else.

*Thanks to [Clay
Johnson](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/people/cjohnson/) and [Emmett
Shear](http://blog.emmettshear.com/) for their comments on drafts of
this essay.*
