The Early Days of A Better Website
==================================

November 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/earlydays)

* * * * *

*A reporter asked me to describe what the early days of our startup were
like. Here’s my response.*

In the early days of Reddit, there were four of us crammed into a dingy
little three-bedroom apartment (I slept in a kitchen cabinet). Every
morning we’d wake up and stumble into the small space that I think was
supposed to be a living room, where we’d placed desks along all four
walls (Steve’s wall had a small window, with a beautiful view of the
wall of the next building over, just a couple feet away). The sky would
be gray, the floor would be filthy, and we’d be three feet floors away
from the rest of the world. Looking back, it’s hard to see how we got
any work done. Actually, looking back, I’m not sure we did.

Aside from the filth, my memories of those days mostly consist of an
unending series of petty annoyances and frustrations. It’s hard spending
your working days in such close quarters with other people. It’s even
harder when you spend your nights there too. And it’s almost impossible
when you’re all high-strung socially-awkward geeks. Tensions frequently
flared.

Not that there wasn’t a lot to get flared about. There were always bugs
or complaints or new features you just couldn’t get to work. And when
you finally got the site working fine, a new storm of traffic would
overwhelm things and you’d be back to picking up the pieces, making it
run faster and more reliably.

There were lots of problems, but somehow we got over them. Take a nap,
walk the fifteen minutes into town to get some food, go across the
street to the abandoned playground, or, when things got really bad, just
look at that ever-growing traffic graph. We must be doing something
right, we figured, or at least not doing much that’s particularly wrong.

While behind the scenes work was a disaster, in public things were going
great. Every time we went out, more people seemed to know what Reddit
was. We started selling Reddit t-shirts and people wearing them and
recognizing started to pop up over town. One fan, on a short trip to
Boston, even made a pilgrimage to our apartment and stole the Reddit
sticker off our door. (We only found out where the missing sticker had
gone when he bragged about it on his blog.) Reddit heads started
appearing on more and more weblogs and sites I read started talking
about Reddit as if they assumed everyone already knew what it was.

At parties, the awkwardness of trying to tell people what we did for a
living (“We, uh, build a website. You know, it’s kind of a news-type
website.”) gave way to recognition (“Oh yeah, I’ve heard of that
site.”), and then to profuse thanks for a great time-waster. Towards the
end, actual introductions became unnecessary — people started
recognizing us and coming up to say hi.

When I went home to visit my family, my dad insisted on setting up a
meeting for me with a magazine publisher he knew. I was sure the visit
would be a disaster — why would a magazine publisher take a punk kid
like me seriously? — but once she heard our monthly visitor numbers, she
was eager to start a partnership. The same scene repeated itself over
and over.

Even when people had no idea what we did, the traffic gave us
confidence. Once we won a free meal at a restaurant (actually, we won at
least three different times) in exchange for suffering through a short
lecture about financial planning opportunities. As the man talked about
being sure to put money away for a safe day, we looked at each other
knowingly. Either we’d sell big or blow up entirely. Staying safe just
wasn’t in our vocabulary.
