Look at yourself objectively
============================

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)

* * * * *

*This post is part three of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

In the 1840s, hospitals were dangerous places. Mothers who went in to
give birth often didn’t make it out. For example, at Vienna General
Hospital’s First Obstetrical Clinic, as many as 10% of mothers died of
puerperal fever after giving birth. But there was some good news: at the
Second Clinic, the number was just 4%. Expectant mothers noticed this —
some would get down on their knees and beg to be admitted to the Second
Clinic. Others, hearing new patients were being admitted to the First
Clinic that day, decided they’d rather give birth in the streets.

Ignaz Semmelweis, an assistant at the First Clinic, couldn’t bear it. He
began desperately searching for some kind of explanation for the
difference. He tested many things without success. Then, in 1847,
Semmelweis’s friend Jakob Kolletschka was performing an autopsy when a
student accidentally poked him with a scalpel. It was a minor injury,
but Kolletschka got terribly sick and ultimately passed away, with
symptoms rather like the what the mothers had. Which got Semmelweis
wondering: was some “deathly material” on the corpses responsible for
the deaths?

To test this, he insisted the doctors begin washing their hands with
chlorinated lime (which he found best removed the stink of death) before
handling the pregnant women. The results were shocking. In April 1847,
the mortality rate was 18.3%. Semmelweis instituted handwashing in
mid-May and by June the mortality rate had crashed to 2.2%. The next
month it was even less and later that year it reached zero — for the
first time ever.

You’d think doctors would be thrilled by this incredible discovery.
Instead, Semmelweis was ridiculed and attacked. He was fired from the
hospital and forced out of Vienna. “In published medical works my
teachings are either ignored or attacked,” he complained. “The medical
faculty at Würzburg awarded a prize to a monograph written in 1859 in
which my teachings were rejected.” Even in his native Vienna, hundreds
of mothers continued to die every year.

Semmelweis turned to alcohol and his behavior became increasingly
erratic. In 1865, he was committed to a mental institution. There he was
beaten by the guards, placed in a straitjacket, and locked in a dark
cell. He died shortly thereafter, at the age of 47, from an infected
wound.^[1](#fn:fn1)^

* * * * *

Why did doctors so stubbornly reject Ignaz Semmelweis? Well, imagine
being told *you* were responsible for the deaths of thousands of your
patients. That you had been killing the people you were supposed to be
protecting. That you were so bad at your job that you were actually
worse than just giving birth in the street.

We all know people don’t like to hear bad news about themselves. Indeed,
we go out of our way to avoid it — and when we do confront it, we try to
downplay it or explain it away. Cognitive dissonance psychologists have
proven it in dozens of experiments: Force students through an
embarrassing initiation to take a class, and they’ll insist the class is
much more interesting. Make them do a favor for someone they hate, and
they start insisting they actually like them. Have them make a small
ethical compromises and they’ll feel comfortable making bigger and
bigger ones. Instead of just accepting we made a mistake, and shouldn’t
have compromised or done the favor or join the class, we start telling
ourselves that compromising isn’t so bad — and when the next compromise
comes along, we believe the lies we tell ourselves, and leap at making
another mistake. We hate hearing bad news about ourselves so much that
we’d rather *change our behavior* than just admit we screwed
up.^[2](#fn:mwm)^

It doesn’t help much when our friends point out what we did wrong. If
we’re so scared of hearing from ourselves that we made a mistake, just
imagine how much we hate hearing it from someone else. And our friends
know this: the answer to “Does this outfit make me look fat?” is not
supposed to be “yes.” We may joke about our friends’ foibles behind
their back, but we rarely do so to their face. Even at work, a lot of
effort goes into making sure employees are insulated from their
superior’s most negative assessments. This is what we’re taught: make
five compliments for every criticism, sandwich negative feedback with
positive feedback on each side, the most important thing is to keep up
someone’s self-esteem.

But, as Semmelweis showed, this is a dangerous habit. Sure, it’s awful
to hear you’re killing people—but it’s way worse to *keep on killing
people*! It may not be fun to get told you’re lazy, but it’s better to
hear it now than to find out when you’re fired. If you want to work on
getting better, you need to start by knowing where you are.

* * * * *

Semmelweis was defeated about as much as a man can be defeated. But
nothing the other doctors could do to him would change the facts.
Eventually scientists proved the germ theory of disease and Semmelweis
was vindicated. Today, he’s an international hero: universities and
hospitals are named after him, his house has been turned into a museum,
Austria even put his face on a €50 gold coin. Meanwhile, the doctors who
opposed him are now seen as close-minded killers.

Try as you might, you can’t beat reality. Semmelweis was right: those
doctors *were* killing people. Firing him, driving him out of the
country, writing long books disproving all his claims — none of it could
change that frightening fact. The doctors may have thought they were
winning the argument at the time, but they were big losers in the long
run. And so were all the families that lost a loved one because they
refused to admit their mistake.

But imagine if they had. When you’re being attacked, conceding you
screwed up seems like the worst thing you can do. If even you won’t
stand up for yourself, how can anyone else believe in you? Admitting
your mistakes seems like giving up; it just proves that your opponents
were right all along. But is it really so bad?

When Oprah started defending fabulist James Frey, she was savaged by the
press. So she invited her critics on the show and apologized, saying
“You were right, I was wrong.” It didn’t destroy her reputation; it
rescued it. When the space shuttle *Columbia* exploded, launch manager
Wayne Hale took full responsibility: “The bottom line is that I failed
to understand what I was being told…I am guilty of allowing Columbia to
crash.” He was promoted. When JFK admitted the responsibility for the
Bay of Pigs fiasco was “mine, and mine alone,” his poll numbers
soared.^[3](#fn:mwm2)^

Imagine the same thing in your own life. If your boss started taking
responsibility for your organization’s problems instead of blaming
others, wouldn’t you like him more? If your doctor told you honestly
that she had screwed up a procedure, instead of trying to cover up the
mistake, wouldn’t you prefer that? If a politician came clean that their
policy proposals had failed, wouldn’t you be more likely to trust him?

In moments of great emotional stress, we revert to our worst habits: we
dig in and fight harder. The real trick is not to get better at fighting
— it’s to get better at stopping ourselves: at taking a deep breath,
calming down, and letting our better natures take over from our worst
instincts.

* * * * *

Even if seeing ourselves objectively is the best option, all our natural
instincts all point the other direction. Not only do we try hard to
avoid bad news about ourselves, we tend to exaggerate the good news.
Imagine you and Jane are both up for a promotion. You want it bad, so
you stay late, you work weekends. Sure, some things still slip through
the cracks — but even those mistakes have really good reasons! Jane
never does anything like that.

But if she did — would you even know? We see the world from our own
perspective. When we have to cancel hanging out with friends to do extra
work, we always see that — and feel the sacrifice. But when Jane does
it, we see and feel nothing. You only get to see your own perspective.
And even our mistakes make sense from our perspective — we see all of
the context, everything that led up to it. It all makes sense because we
saw it happen. When we screw up, it’s for a reason. When other people
screw up, it’s because they’re screwups.

* * * * *

Looking at ourselves objectively isn’t easy. But it’s essential if we
ever want to get better. And if we don’t do it, we leave ourselves open
to con artists and ethical compromisers who prey on our desire to
believe we’re perfect. There’s no one solution, but here are some tricks
I use to get a more accurate sense of myself:

*Embrace your failings.* Be willing to believe the worst about yourself.
Remember: it’s much better to accept that you’re a selfish, racist moron
and try to improve, than to continue sleepwalking through life that way
as the only one who doesn’t know it.

*Studiously avoid euphemism.* People try and sugarcoat the tough facts
about themselves by putting them in the best light possible. They say
“Well, I was going to get to it, but then there was that big news story
today” and not “Yeah, I was procrastinating on it and started reading
the news instead.” Stating things plainly makes it easier to confront
the truth.

*Reverse your projections.* Every time you see yourself complaining
about other groups or other people, stop yourself and think: “is it
possible, is there any way, that someone out there might be making the
same complaints about me?”

*Look up, not down.* It’s always easy to make yourself look good by
finding people even worse than you. Yes, we agree, you’re not the worst
person in the world. That’s not the question. The question is whether
you can get better — and to do that you need to look at the people who
are even better than you.

*Criticize yourself.* The main reason people don’t tell you what they
really think of you is they’re afraid of your reaction. (If they’re
right to be afraid, then you need to start by working on that.) But
people will feel more comfortable telling you the truth if you start by
criticizing yourself, showing them that it’s OK.

*Find honest friends.* There are some people who are just congenitally
honest. For others, it’s possible to build a relationship of honesty
over time. Either way, it’s important to find friends who you can trust
to tell to tell you the harsh truths about yourself. *This is really
hard* — most people don’t like telling harsh truths. Some people have
had success providing an anonymous feedback form for people to submit
their candid reactions.

*Listen to the criticism.* Since it’s so rare to find friends who will
honestly criticize you, you need to listen extra-carefully when they do.
It’s tempting to check what they say against your other friends. For
example, if one friend says the short story you wrote isn’t very good,
you might show it to some other friends and ask them what they think.
Wow, they all think it’s great! Guess that one friend was just an
outlier. But the fact is that most of your friends are going to say it’s
great because they’re your friend; by just taking their word for it, you
end up ignoring the one person who’s actually being honest with you.

*Take the outside view.* As I said before, we’re always locked in our
own heads, where everything we do makes sense. So try seeing what you
look like from the outside for a bit, assuming you don’t know any of
those details. Sure, your big money-making plan sounds like a great idea
when you explain it, but if you throw that away, is there any external
evidence that it will work?

**Next in this series:** [Lean into the
pain](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dalio)

* * * * *

1.  “[Ignaz Semmelweis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ignaz_Semmelweis)”,
    *Wikipedia* ([visited
    2012-08-13](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ignaz_Semmelweis&oldid=501540461)). [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Carol Tavris and Elliot Aaronson, *[Mistakes Were Made (but not by
    me): Why We Justify Foolish Beliefs, Bad Decisions, and Hurtful
    Acts](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0156033909)*, (2007), ch.
    1. [↩](#fnref:mwm)

3.  *Mistakes Were Made*, ch. 8. A larger study of public companies also
    found that companies which admitted screwing up tended to have
    higher stock prices. Fiona Lee, Christopher Peterson, and Larissa Z.
    Tiedens, “[Mea Culpa: Predicting Stock Prices From Organizational
    Attributions](http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0146167204266654),”
    *Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,* **30**: 12 (December
    2004), 1636–1649. [↩](#fnref:mwm2)


