Libertarianism and the State
============================

July 6, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tabarroklibertarianism)

* * * * *

*This is a parody of [a post by Alex Tabarrok defending employer
tyranny](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/libertarianism-and-the-workplace-ii.html).*

Over at Marginal Revolution, Alex Tabarrok and Tyler Cowen are upset
about what they call lack of freedom in the country. They give a grab
bag of peculiar examples such as how people can be arrested for smoking
drugs, [not paying
debts](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/more-on-debtors-prisons.html),
and, once in prison, can be [forbidden from reading
books](http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2012/07/solitary-confinement.html),
and more.

In other words, the MRers have discovered that the most basic
governments are sovereign which means that citizens can be put in jail
for just about any reason. Simply put, an government can arrest you if
they don’t like you. This is a surprise?

The MRers do not adequately acknowledge that citizens have the same
rights as politicians. Citizens can leave the country for any reason and
they can refuse to enter any country. If you don’t like the politices of
the United States, or Australia or Venezuela you don’t have to live
there or even visit. Indeed, citizens have more rights than politicians
since citizens are not subject to judicial review; that is, politicians
are typically prohibited from passing laws against certain political
viewpoints but citizens are not prohibited from only entering countries
where those viewpoints are marginal.

If you think that the freedom to leave is without value, bear in mind
that under dictatorships and totalitarian states governments could
prevent citizens from leaving and from moving. The freedom to leave was
hard won. We should not disparage the liberation brought by the right to
exit.

Turning to the economics, the MRers are so outraged by an government’s
legal possibilities that they fail to notice that most governments do
not in fact arrest people for smoking drugs or for failing to pay debts.
Why not? The reason is that these rights are often more valuable to the
citizen than to the politician and thus both citizen and politician can
be made better off if the citizen keeps the rights. If the politician
values the right more than the citizen then the politician buys the
right with lower taxes or less regulation in other areas. If the citizen
values the right more than the politician then the citizen retains the
right at an otherwise higher tax rate. The politician gets the right
only when the politician pays.

This is not to say that abuses do not occur, they do, as in all
relationships and on both sides, but the MRers lump abuses and mutually
profitable exchanges together–that’s dangerous because in regulating
abuses it is very easy to do away with mutually profitable exchanges.

The greater the productivity of citizens and the higher their incomes
the less citizens will be willing to sell rights for lower taxes (i.e.
the more willing they will be to pay for better regulatory conditions).
Citizens gain more autonomy as they and their society become more
productive. Thus, the best protector of citizen autonomy is high
productivity and economic growth.

To understand freedom and true coercion let us remember that American
citizens have the freedom to leave and visit other countries, a freedom
that gun, barbed wire and electrified fence deny to many millions of
less fortunate citizens from around the world.
