Wither the Two Cultures?
========================

December 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/twocultures)

* * * * *

Nearly fifty years ago C. P. Snow delivered his famous “Two Cultures”
lecture, deploring the state of affairs in which the humanities,
especially those who believed in constructionism, had intellectually
diverged from the sciences. Scientists didn’t care about Shakespeare;
while literists bragged about not knowing any math.

But pick up a modern popular novel and it’s hard to see this criticism
holding much weight. All the literary outlets have been touting Thomas
Pynchon’s new tome, *Against the Day*. Pynchon’s novels, as eminent
literist Scott McLemee put it, discuss “the domains of information
theory, mathematical physics, cosmology” with frequent references to
such subjects as “William Hamilton’s quaternions or Georg Riemann’s zeta
function” in which the Michelson-Morley experiment takes center stage.

It’s hard to imagine anything but a new Richard Feynman book could do
more to warm a scientist’s heart.

Meanwhile, take Jonathan Franzen’s bestseller, *The Corrections* (even
an Oprah’s book club pick!). The book, which revolves around the dot-com
economic upturn, not only features frequent and detailed references to
eigenvector-based computer algorithms, advances in neurological
technology, and odd properties of electrophoresis, but even features a
main character who goes from being in that most constructivist of
professions — left-wing literary criticism — to a job building dot-com
websites.

It seems geekiness has gone mainstream. And along with it, the geeky
culture of scientism now buts up against the aesthete culture of
literism. It’s hard to see how anyone can take the two cultures
complaints seriously anymore.
