The Capital of Scandinavia
==========================

January 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingsweden)

* * * * *

Sweden is a fascinating country, although it doesn’t appear that way at
first. The Stockholm airport tries hard to sell you on the city’s
importance, lining the walls with the faces of famous residents, none of
whom I recognize. Stockholm is “The Capital of Scandinavia”, at least
according to the wall, the information desk, and the “You Are Here”
signs spread around the city. All the signs are in English as well as
Swedish and we didn’t see a single person the entire trip who couldn’t
speak English (although one declined to).

Nor does the ride from the airport suggest anything special — the road
is lined with the office parks of big companies, much like the streets
of Silicon Valley. And the city seems, well, like a city, at least until
you realize that’s your apartment, not simply downtown.

Most American cities are still suffering from the “urban planning”
designed to keep non-existent factory fumes away from people’s homes.
Even in San Francisco, where all sorts of crazy things are crammed into
one small peninsula, there is still a clear separation of residence and
business — blocks of victorian row houses, then a cross street with a
bunch of shops.

But as far as I could tell, Stockholm doesn’t have any such residential
zones. All the apartments seemed to be on the floor above the normal
street life; the two deeply intertwingled; just the way I like it. (See
*The Death and Life of Great American Cities* for more reasons.)

The apartments — *all* the apartments — are rent controlled, one of the
socialist remnants in Sweden’s social democracy. In practice, this leads
to some odd results. No one ever gives up an apartment, so tenants feel
safe installing nameplates on their doors. Instead of giving up the
place, they give it to their family, their friends, or let their
children inherit it. Once you have an apartment contract, you can swap
it with anyone else’s (and there are web sites to help you do this), but
to get one you need to add your name to a list when you turn 18, and
then wait for ten to twenty years for an apartment to open up. Those
with money but not that kind of time instead pay under the table for a
contract.

There are no homeless people in Stockholm, but one person I spoke to
claimed that this was because the homeless didn’t know anyone with a
rent contract, so they all stayed in the suburbs, which they were more
familiar with anyway, and as a result there ended up being about as many
homeless per capita as in a the average American city.

Backlash politics is incredibly popular in the US, where there’s not
that much to backlash against, but it’s even more popular in Sweden,
where there’s some justification. US-style libertarians are everywhere,
this time with some actual justification for their persecution
complexes. Although not much. A new conservative government has recently
taken power and has pulled all the libertarians out to fill up the
political positions.

Our roommate just happened to hang out with libertarians in college; now
all her friends are top officials in the government. A smaller country,
it starts to seem like everyone knows everybody here (I suppose they all
went to college together).

Of course, there are still outsiders. The country has private email
mailing lists on which all the gossip about how the county is *actually*
run (and who the royalty is *actually* screwing) is shared among the
prominent journalists and other figures. (There are similar secret lists
in other fields, including one for the left-wing of the US Democratic
Party.) Journalists know that sharing that kind of information with the
public simply isn’t done and those who violate the rules are
unceremoniously kicked off. Occasionally a young reporter uses their
column to complain they’re not on the list, but the people in the know
just laugh at them.

It’s the same kind of laugh you imagine Sweden’s IKEA founders having
[as you marvel at their clever tax-dodging
schemes](http://www.economist.com/PrinterFriendly.cfm?story_id=6919139).
IKEA, the famed Swedish interior design chain now sweeping the US, is
owned by a company called Ingka Holding, which is actually owned by a
tax-exempt not-for-profit — the world’s largest, even larger than the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. (Not that selling interior
furnishings is at all comparable to curing Malaria.) The not-for-profit
channels its funds to a Dutch foundation which is operated by a Swiss
lawyer friend but shares some of its assets with another Dutch company
which is owned by a Luxembourg holding company which is owned by a
company in the Netherlands which is run by a trust in the Carribean. You
can probably guess where the tax-free money goes from there.

IKEA is everywhere in Sweden. Their couches fill the tiny
rent-controlled apartments, their chairs are found in everyone’s
offices, and when you finish your drink the light shining through the
bottom of the glass illuminates the word: IKEA.
