The Reason So Many People Are Unemployed
========================================

March 14, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whynojobs)

* * * * *

Around the time of the Great Depression, a man named John Maynard Keynes
made an incredible discovery. The reason so many people were out of work
was not really because of irresponsible banks or high taxes or reckless
government policy. It was really much simpler than all that: there
wasn’t enough money.

Now, as individuals, we’d all like a little more money for ourselves.
But pause for a moment and think about what it means if there isn’t
enough money in the economy as a *whole*. A good way to wrap your head
around this is to think about a much smaller case: instead of the whole
economy, let’s think about a now-famous babysitting co-op on Capitol
Hill. Instead of dollars, the co-op used its own scrip that was worth an
hour of babysitting time. When you wanted to go out, you’d pay a couple
hours to someone else to watch your kids; then when they wanted to go
out, they’d pay you or someone else to do the same for them.

It all worked great for a while, until one day they found they had too
few pieces of scrip. Every couple had only a couple hours left and,
having so little, they didn’t want to waste it. So they all decided to
save it for a very special occasion. This was kind of an incredible
situation — even though there were people who wanted someone to babysit
their kids, and people who were willing to do just that, the deal didn’t
happen, simply because the co-op hadn’t printed enough colored pieces of
paper. Eventually the co-op learned their mistake, printed some more
scrip and handed it out, and everybody went back to babysitting like
before and were much happier for it.

The same thing happens in the real economy. When there aren’t enough
green-colored pieces of paper around, everybody gets worried and holds
on to the little they have. Even if you’d like someone to build an
extension on your house, and there’s someone else out there who’d like
to build an extension on your house, the deal doesn’t happen, just
because you don’t have enough green pieces of paper (or, more
realistically, dollars in your bank account). This is a total waste. You
don’t get the extension and the other guy doesn’t get a job, all because
we haven’t run the printing presses enough (or added enough zeroes to
the bank’s computers).

Before the Great Depression, most countries wouldn’t simply print more
colored pieces of paper. They were on the “gold standard” and they would
only print more currency when more gold was discovered. This led to the
most bizarre series of booms and busts as more gold was discovered in
strange places and then “used up” by population growth or other things.
After Keynes, countries eventually stopped this silliness and just
started printing their money directly. [As soon as they abandoned the
gold
standard](http://phoenixwoman.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/delong-march2009.jpg),
they begun recovering from the Great Depression.

But the power to print more money is obviously a very special power and
you wouldn’t want it to fall into the wrong hands. So, in the United
States, we’ve taken it away from elected politicians and given it
(mostly) to the big banks. The banks select people to run their local
Federal Reserve and then some of those people (along with some
additional folks nominated by the President) are selected to be members
of a group called the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The FOMC,
essentially, decides how much money there should be in circulation,
which in turn decides how many people have jobs.

You might think this sounds crazy — a bunch of unelected bankers get to
decide how many people have jobs? — and, in fact, it is crazy. But I’m
not making it up. Ask a macroeconomist, like Paul Krugman, and this is
exactly what he’ll tell you. And if you look in the Federal Reserve Act
or on the Fed’s website, you’ll find their
[mission](http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm) is to
“promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and
moderate long-term interest rates.” These multiple goals are relatively
recent; before 1978, the goal was simply “maximum employment,
production, and purchasing power.”

Now some people will claim that the Federal Reserve has done all it can
to create more jobs but the recession is so deep this time that there’s
nothing else it can do. But that’s just not true — even the chairman of
the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, says it’s not true. He was asked
about this in a Senate hearing. As the *Economist* [summarized his
response](http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2009/12/from_the_horses_mouth):
“Mr Bernanke does not want to risk a de-anchoring of inflation
expectations. He is willing to accept 10% or greater unemployment and
the resulting economic and political fall-out in order to avoid that
risk.”

Which brings us to the subject of inflation. Obviously if you print a
lot of new money, it makes existing money worth a little less. This is
annoying, but is it worse than having people out of work? Well, it
depends who you are. If you have a lot of money, you’re more worried
about it becoming worth less. But if you work for a living, you’re more
worried about people being out of work. As you might expect, Mr.
Bernanke has a lot of money, as do the other bankers on the committee
and the people who selected them. So they’ve decided to let millions and
millions of people be unemployed and the rest of us experience the
resulting recession rather than risk the chance that some of their money
might be worth a little less.

The biggest reason this is possible is because nobody realizes it. If it
was conventional wisdom that a bunch of unelected bankers looking out
for rich people were the reason everyone was out of work, politicians
would be forced to explain to angry voters why we had this crazy system
and might actually consider doing something about it. But, incredibly,
it just seems like nobody has any idea. Voters don’t realize it,
politicians don’t understand it, journalists don’t cover it. And, in
fact, they’re so far from having any idea that it’s really difficult to
explain it to them. When you say a bunch of unelected bankers are the
reason there are no jobs, they just look at you like you’re crazy. I’ve
just spent a page or two explaining it and you still probably think I’m
crazy. But it’s true! This isn’t some Ron Paul-type crackpot idea; this
is mainstream economics, from Paul Krugman to the head of George W.
Bush’s Council of Economic Advisors.

I feel a bit like the guy in one of those movies, going around and
telling everyone that the murderer is standing right over there — right
there, look! — but nobody believes him and people continue to die. It’s
incredibly frustrating, and I have no idea what to do about it.

One final point: How did we get into this mess in the first place? Why
did we suddenly find ourselves without enough money? Well, there was a
housing bubble: for many years, house prices kept going up and up for no
other reason than everyone was betting that they were just going to keep
going up. When house prices were unsustainably high, that was part of
the money in circulation. But when the music stopped and the bubble
popped, house prices cratered and nearly \$8 trillion disappeared
overnight. The government has printed a bunch of money since then, but
nowhere near the \$8 trillion we lost. Obviously a lot of other bad
stuff happened during the financial crisis, but this is the reason
everybody is out of work.
