Obama’s Strategy: A Debate
==========================

November 22, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/obamastrat)

* * * * *

**[A Liberal Shock
Doctrine](http://www.prospect.org/cs/articles?article=a_liberal_shock_doctrine)**:
Our economy is collapsing. There’s a Democratic majority in the House
and possibly a supermajority in the Senate. In the last election, both
parties campaigned on change and the candidate accused of socialism won,
by a solid majority. There will never be another time like now.

Obama must take swift action to pass radical change. Fill the cabinet
with vocal progressives, push a series of strong progressive bills thru
Congress, take full advantage of the first hundred days. Anything else
will squander the promise of this election.

* * * * *

*[The Audacity of
Patience](http://prospect.org/cs/articles?article=the_audacity_of_patience)*:
If Obama tries to pass his wishlist in the first hundred days, it will
blow up in his face. Not because America is a center-right country, but
because it’s a left-wing one. The radical conservatives knew it was
unlikely they would hold on to power, so they had to do as much as they
could in the time they had. Progressives don’t face that deadline; it
now seems possible to permanently destroy this incarnation of the
Republicans Party.

What’s needed is not urgent action, but the slow and careful work of
building an enduring majority. That means bringing in Republicans,
occupying the rhetorical (if not political) center, and passing
incremental steps that lead to lasting change. But most importantly, it
means being effective. We don’t need partisans, we need people with
experience who can get things done. Even moderate bills passed now can
ensure Democratic domination for a generation, allowing plenty of
opportunity to improve things in the decades to come.

* * * * *

**Open the Overton Window:** This is how it starts. First it’s the
campaign, then the first hundred days, then the midterms, then
reelection, then more midterms, and then the next nominee’s campaign
(who is unlikely to be as talented or progressive as this one). There’s
always an excuse to put off the important changes.

If you’re serious about lasting change, hiring moderates is the wrong
way to go. It doesn’t attract Republicans; it just sends the message
Democrats aren’t serious. The electorate likes success; if success comes
from Democrats, then they’ll like Democrats. A progressive cabinet can
move the ball forward by having their agencies implement countless small
reforms while using their status as public figures to build support for
bigger ones. All of which will further cement the Democrats’ reputation
as the party of progress. The country isn’t left-wing because it likes
people with blue logos and D’s next to their names; it’s left-wing
because it wants shared prosperity and security. If Democrats don’t
deliver, they’ll turn to someone else.

* * * * *

*Spin Up the Noise Machine:* It’s not the Cabinet’s job to push new
policy ideas. They can’t — their job is to push the President’s agenda
and promote official doctrine. Building support for new ideas is the job
of the ideological infrastructure that Democrats have been building over
the past eight years: CAP, CAF, TAP, and the rest. Sure, during the Bush
Administration they had to spend all their time fighting bad ideas, but
with a Democratic president they can start rallying support for good
ones.

And a President who leads as a consensus figure will be much more
effective at passing them. America is sick of fierce partisanship; it
longs for a government it can believe in again. A Cabinet of moderates
and conservatives will be much more convincing salespeople for
progressive proposals than a group of fire-breathing liberals.

* * * * *

**An American Renewal:** Do you seriously believe that? Sure, we can all
agree this administration has been a disaster, but once Bush and his
cronies recede into the distance, this coalition of moderates and
conservatives will fall apart. The factions will start sniping at each
other in the press, use their control over staff to advance their own
agendas, and just generally try to sabotage the President’s proposals —
and with it, his appearance of effectiveness.

This country has been very badly misrun for almost a decade. Shills for
industry pervade the regulators, conservative loyalists have burrowed
deep into every agency, and public discussion has been pulled so far
right that most people don’t even remember what a left-wing idea looks
like. (As opposed to the purely *factual* questions the left has been
consistently correct about.) What’s needed is a process of serious
American renewal. A bunch of DC think-tanks pushing policy papers isn’t
going to do it; the problems are serious enough that leadership has to
come from the top.

* * * * *

*Blow-Up:* Which brings me back to where I started. You can’t just spin
this country around in an instant; it will take years of hard work.
Sure, a coalition of moderates may end up falling apart, but a group of
fervent partisans will never get off the ground. Even with the crisis,
America just isn’t ready for a complete policy reversal. Our best hope
is to take them there gradually — passing increasingly ambitious policy,
appointing increasingly progressive officials, electing increasingly
progressive candidates. There are no quick fixes; that’s what we’ll have
to do if you really want to win.
