Wikimedia at the Crossroads
===========================

August 31, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: **Wikimedia at the Crossroads**\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

A couple weeks ago I had the great privilege of attending Wikimania, the
international Wikimedia conference. Hundreds from all over the world
gathered there to discuss the magic that is Wikipedia, thinking hard
about what it means and why it works. It was an amazing intellectual and
emotional experience.

The main attraction was seeing the vibrant Wikipedia community. There
were the hardcore Wikipedians, who spend their days reviewing changes
and fixing pages. And there were the elder statesmen, like Larry Lessig
and Brewster Kahle, who came to meet the first group and tell them how
their work fits into a bigger picture. Spending time with all these
people was amazing fun — they’re all incredibly bright, enthusiastic
and, most shockingly, completely dedicated to a cause greater than
themselves.

At most “technology” conferences I’ve been to, the participants
generally talk about technology for its own sake. If *use* ever gets
discussed, it’s only about using it to make vast sums of money. But at
Wikimania, the primary concern was doing the most good for the world,
with technology as the tool to help us get there. It was an incredible
gust of fresh air, one that knocked me off my feet.

There was another group attending, however: the people holding up the
platform on which this whole community stands. I spent the first few
days with the mostly-volunteer crew of hackers who keep the websites up
and running. In later days, I talked to the site administrators who
exercise the power that the software gives them. And I heard much about
the Wikimedia Foundation, the not-for-profit that controls and runs the
sites.

Much to my surprise, this second group was almost the opposite of the
first. With a few notable exceptions, when they were off-stage they
talked gossip and details: how do we make the code stop doing this, how
do we get people to stop complaining about that, how can we get this
other group to like us more. Larger goals or grander visions didn’t come
up in their private conversations; instead they seemed absorbed by the
issues of the present.

Of course, they have plenty to be absorbed by. Since January,
Wikipedia’s traffic has more than doubled and this group is beginning to
strain under the load. At the technical level, the software development
and server systems are both managed by just one person, Brion Vibber,
who appears to have his hands more-than-full just keeping everything
running. The entire system has been cobbled together as the site has
grown, a messy mix of different kinds of computers and code, and keeping
it all running sounds like a daily nightmare. As a result, actual
software development goes rather slowly, which cannot help but affect
the development of the larger project.

The small coterie of site administrators, meanwhile, are busy dealing
with the ever-increasing stream of complaints from the public. The
recent Seigenthaler affair, in which the founding editor of *USA Today*
noisily attacked Wikipedia for containing an grievous error in its
article on him, has made people very cautious about how Wikipedia treats
living people. (Although [to judge just from the traffic
numbers](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikigrowth), one might think more
such affairs might be a good idea…) One administrator told me how he
spends his time scrubbing Wikipedia clean of unflattering facts about
people who call the head office to complain.

Finally, the Wikimedia Foundation Board seems to have devolved into
inaction and infighting. Just four people have been actually hired by
the Foundation, and even they seem unsure of their role in a
largely-volunteer community. Little about this group — which, quite
literally, controls Wikipedia — is known by the public. Even when they
were talking to dedicated Wikipedians at the conference, they put a
public face on things, saying little more than “don’t you folks worry,
we’ll straighten everything out”.

* * * * *

The plain fact is that Wikipedia’s gotten too big to be run by just a
couple of people. One way or another, it’s going to have to become an
organization; the question is what kind. Organizational structures are
far from neutral: whose input gets included decides what actions get
taken, the positions that get filled decide what things get focused on,
the vision at the top sets the path that will be followed.

I worry that Wikipedia, as we know it, might not last. That its feisty
democracy might ossify into staid bureaucracy, that its innovation might
stagnate into conservatism, that its growth might slow to stasis. Were
such things to happen, I know I could not just stand by and watch the
tragedy. Wikipedia is just too important — both as a resource and as a
model — to see fail.

That is why, after much consideration, I’ve decided to run for a seat on
the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board. I’ve been a fairly dedicated
Wikipedian since 2003, adding and editing pages whenever I came across
them. I’ve gone to a handful of Wikipedia meetups and even got my photo
on the front page of the *Boston Globe* as an example Wikipedian. But
I’ve never gotten particularly involved in Wikipedia politics — I’m not
an administrator, I don’t get involved in policy debates, I hardly even
argue on the “talk pages”. Mostly, I just edit.

And, to be honest, I wish I could stay that way. When people at
Wikimania suggested I run for a Board seat, I shrugged off the idea. But
since then, I’ve become increasingly convinced that I should run, if
only to bring attention to these issues. Nobody else seems to be
seriously discussing this challenge.

The election begins today and lasts three weeks. As it rolls on, I plan
to regularly publish essays like this one, examining the questions that
face Wikipedia in depth. Whether I win or not, I hope we can use this
opportunity for a grand discussion about where we should be heading and
what we can do to get there. That said, if you’re an eligible
Wikipedian, I hope that you’ll please [vote for
me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election).
