Say Goodbye to Embarrassment
============================

January 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/emotions)

* * * * *

I’ve decided to stop being embarrassed. I’m saying goodbye to the whole
thing: that growing suspicion as the moment approaches, that sense of
realization when it comes, that rush of blood reddening your cheeks,
that brief but powerful desire to jump out of your own skin, and then
finally that attempt big fake smile trying to cover it all. Sure, it was
fun for a while, but I think it’s outlived its usefulness. It’s time for
embarrassment to go.

Turning off an emotion is always a tough decision. I remember how a
couple years ago I decided to say goodbye to anger. Sure, anger has its
bright moments — you haven’t really lived until you’ve known that
special joy of hurling a chair across the room — but it’s also quite
time-consuming. Every time someone comes up and hits you, you have to
run around chasing after them. And once you start getting angry it’s
hard to stop — an angry person doesn’t really want to calm down, it sort
of *enjoys* being angry. So I finally decided to get rid of the whole
thing. And you know what? I haven’t regretted the decision one bit.

Regret — that’s another interesting emotion. I mean, what purpose does
it really serve? “There’s no use crying over spilled milk,” my mom once
told me when I started sobbing after I got milk all over the floor while
trying to make cereal. “I suppose that’s true,” I replied between sobs.
“Although maybe my tears will dilute the milk and make it stick to the
floor less.” But I was wrong — the milk stayed just as sticky. So maybe
regret should be the next one to go.

But actually, I think it’s going to be frustration. It’s not discussed
much, but frustration is really quite distracting. You’re trying to
solve some difficult problem but it’s just not working. Instead of
taking a moment to try and think of the solution, you just keep getting
more and more frustrated until you start jumping up and down and
smashing various things. So not only do you waste time jumping, but you
also have to pay to replace the stuff you smashed. It’s really a net
loss.

But that’s a decision for another time. Today it’s time for
embarrassment to join anger in the wastebasket of deactivated emotions.
It might take some getting used to at first — when friends try to tease
me about something I’ll probably start to react before realizing there’s
just no need for it anymore — but before long I’m sure it will seem
normal. Even if I’m a less normal person for it.
