The Politics of Wikipedians
===========================

December 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikimao)

* * * * *

A film director named Jaron Lanier recently published [an essay titled
“Digital
Maoism”](http://www.edge.org/3rd_culture/lanier06/lanier06_index.html).
The essay is a dreadful mishmash of name-calling, whining, and downright
incoherence, but insofar as Lanier has a point, it is this: people often
attribute facts and claims to “Wikipedia”, as if it was some giant hive
mind that combined all our individual thoughts into one group opinion.
But, in reality, Wikipedia is simply written by people, people with
individual voices and ideas. And technology is making us lose sight of
that.

(I maybe doing Lanier too great a service by attributing such a coherent
view to him as nothing quite so clear is ever actually expressed in the
article. Nonetheless, I will continue as if this is Lanier’s view.)

It is an interesting point, but what Lanier finds so frightening is
precisely what I find so exciting about these technologies. I still
remember the light bulb that went off in my head when my friend Dan
Connolly answered a question by saying “According to Google, X is the
case.” “Google” had said no such thing, of course, but the Google
algorithm had processed all the links on the Web and send Dan the page
it thought most relevant to his query. It was this particular page that
said X, of course, but the notion that Google itself was answering
questions in this way was a revelation.

The same is true of Wikipedia. There are individual people, obviously,
but what makes Wikipedia so fascinating are the technical and social
processes that combine their work, turning it into something no
individual person is responsible for or would necessarily endorse.

I often find myself wondering what Wikipedia would say about
such-and-such a subject or how important Wikipedia thinks something else
is. I refuse to edit my Wikipedia page, not only because it’s bad form,
but because I’m genuinely curious about how Wikipedia sees me. It’s an
odd thing, to think a site that anyone can edit actually has opinions or
concerns or a point of view on the world, but it does, and it’s a
fascinating one.
