Shifting the Terms of Debate: How Big Business Covered Up Global Warming
========================================================================

June 6, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1)

* * * * *

*[Here’s the first part of an article I wrote last year about how
right-wing think tanks shift the debate.]*

In 2004, Michelle Malkin, a conservative editorialist, published the
book *In Defense of Internment*. It argued that declassified security
intercepts showed that Japanese internment during World War II — the
government policy that relocated thousands of Japanese to concentration
camps — was actually justified in the name of national security. We
needed to learn the truth, Malkin insisted, so that we could see how
racial profiling was similarly justified to fight the “war on terror.”

Bainbridge Island was the center of the evacuations; to this day,
residents still feel ashamed and teach students a special unit about the
incident, entitled “Leaving Our Island”. But one parent in the district,
Mary Dombrowski, was persuaded by Malkin’s book that the evacuation was
actually justified and insisted the school was teaching a one-sided
version of the internment story, “propaganda” that forced impressionable
children into thinking that the concentration camps were a mistake.

The school’s principal defended the practice. As the *Seattle Times*
reported:

> “We do teach it as a mistake,” she said, noting that the U.S.
> government has admitted it was wrong. “As an educator, there are some
> things that we can say aren’t debatable anymore.” Slavery, for
> example. Or the internment — as opposed to a subject such as global
> warming, she
> said.[†](http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2002027639_bainbridge06m.html)

True, Japanese internment isn’t a controversial issue like global
warming, but ten years ago, global warming wasn’t a controversial issue
either. In 1995, the UN’s panel on international climate change released
its consensus report, finding that global warming was a real and serious
issue that had to be quickly confronted. The media covered the
scientists’ research and the population agreed, leading President
Clinton to say he would sign an international treaty to stop global
warming.

Then came the backlash. The Global Climate Coalition (funded by over 40
major corporate groups like Amoco, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and
General Motors) began spending millions of dollars each year to derail
the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty to help reduce global
warming. They held conferences entitled “The Costs of Kyoto,” issued
press releases and faxes dismissing the scientific evidence for global
warming, and spent more than \$3 million on newspaper and television ads
claiming Kyoto would mean a “50-cent-per-gallon gasoline
tax.”[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html)

The media, in response to flurries of “blast faxes” (a technique in
which a press release is simultaneously faxed to thousands of
journalists) and accusations of left-wing bias, began backing off from
the scientific
evidence.[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html) A
recent study found only 35% of newspaper stories on global warming
accurately described the scientific consensus, with the majority
implying that scientists who believed in global warming were just as
common as global warming deniers (of which there were only a tiny
handful, almost all of whom had received funding from energy companies
or associated groups).[†](http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=1978)

It all had an incredible effect on the public. In 1993, 88% of Americans
thought global warming was a serious problem. By 1997, that number had
fallen to 42%, with only 28% saying immediate action was necessary.
^[1](#fn:1)^ And so Clinton changed course and insisted that cutting
emissions should be put off for 20 years.

US businesses seriously weakened the Kyoto Protocol, leading it to
require only a 7% reduction in emissions (compared to the 20% requested
by European nations) and then President Bush refused to sign on to even
that.[†](http://www.prwatch.org/prwissues/1997Q4/warming.html) In four
short years, big business had managed to turn nearly half the country
around and halt the efforts to protect the planet.

And now, the principal on Bainbridge Island, like most people, thinks
global warming is a hotly contested issue — the paradigmatic example of
a hotly contested issue — even when the science is clear. (“There’s no
better scientific consensus on this on any issue I know,” said the head
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “except maybe
Newton’s second law of dynamics.”)^[2](#fn:2)^ But all this debate about
problems has kept us away from talk about solutions. As journalist Ross
Gelbspan puts it, “By keeping the discussion focused on whether there is
a problem in the first place, they have effectively silenced the debate
over what to do about it.”[†](http://dieoff.org/page82.htm) So is it any
wonder that conservatives want to do the same thing again? And again?
And again?

*Next:* [Part 2: Making Noise](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2)

CNN, *USA Today* poll (conducted by Gallup). “We’d like your impression
of what scientists believe…?”, November 1997. In *Roper Center for
Public Opinion Research* (0287624, 072). USGALLUP.97NV06, R31.

NBC News, *Wall Street Journal* poll (conducted by Hart and Teeter).
“From what you know about global climate change…?”, October 1997. In
*Roper Center for Public Opinion Research* (0291162, 077).
USNBCWSJ.97OC25, R30B.

* * * * *

1.  Cambridge Reports, Research International poll. “Do you feel that
    global warming is a very serious problem…?”, *Cambridge Reports
    National Omnibus Survey*, September 1993, in *Roper Center for
    Public Opinion Research* (0290350, 039). USCAMREP.93SEP,
    R40. [↩](#fnref:1)

2.  Warrick, Joby. “Consensus Emerges Earth Is Warming — Now What?”,
    *Washington Post*, 12 Nov. 1997: A01. [↩](#fnref:2)


