Think Bigger: A Generalist Manifesto
====================================

December 14, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbigger)

* * * * *

Our world is full of forces pushing us towards specificity. Open a
newspaper and it’s divided into topic sections. Go to the bookstore and
it’s divided into subject categories. Go to school and the classes are
all in separate fields. Get a degree and you have to study in a
particular major. Get a job and you have to work at a particular task.

The world needs specificists, of course, but it also needs generalists.
And we see precious few of those. It’s not hard to see why: try to do
something big and everyone will try to talk you out of it.

“That’s impossible,” they’ll say. “Do that and you’ll only drive
yourself crazy.”

“If that worked, don’t you think someone else would have done it?”

“With all due respect, what makes you the expert on that subject?”

Tell someone you’re working on a dissertation about the mating dance of
the East African dung beetle and they won’t bat an eye. It would be the
height of impoliteness to ask “Is that really worth spending three years
on?” — even if that’s exactly what you’re thinking. But set your sights
a little bit higher and people have no problem knocking you down. “Come
on,” they’ll say, furrowing their brow, “do you really think you’re
going to be able to pull something like that off?”

Don’t listen to them. People are afraid of grandeur; it challenges the
status quo. But you shouldn’t be. “Look up more” should be your motto;
“Think bigger” your mantra.

The first step is to recognize your place in things. If you study beetle
mating habits, look at the larger mating patterns your studies fall
into, look at the big picture of animal behavior, ask where you fit in
the bigger question of what it means for an animal to behave. This is
what I mean by “Look up more.”

But if you do this—and I believe you will—then you’ll find it hard to
stay satisfied with your dung beetle project. You’ll start wondering if
you could move on to bigger things. Perhaps just a little bit bigger at
first—analyzing a few more types, discussing a few more implications—but
soon you’ll notice that others have left the field wide open for the
truly big picture stuff and you’ll start wondering why it’s not there
that you should stake your claim. This is what I mean by “Think bigger.”

Sure, at first it’ll be frightening biting off more than you’ve ever had
to chew. But the fear will soon give way to exhilaration and the extra
work involved will be paid for in the additional notoriety, in the joy
of knowing that you’ve made a real difference. After all, do you really
want to spend the rest of your life studying dung beetles?
