A Life Offline
==============

May 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/offline)

* * * * *

I have literally had a computer since birth; the Internet came not long
after that: I still remember email addresses supplemented by UUCP
bang-paths. Hardly a day has gone by in which I haven’t checked my email
for what must be a decade.

The Internet has kept me connected to people—as a child, all my best
friends were online; as an adult, all my coworkers are. My jobs do not
take place in an office; they take place over email, where time and
place do not matter. The upside, is that I can go anywhere and still do
them. The downside, is I cannot get away from them.

I need to take a break. My life has become entangled with technology and
pressure that I hardly know any other way of life. So I’m planning to
spend the month of June (June 6 to July 4, to be exact) offline. I’m
packing up the laptop and the cable modem and sending them someplace far
away. I’m going back to the world of paper and books.

Of course, my phone is now a computer too, so that will also have to go.
I don’t have a landline, so if folks want to talk to me they’ll have to
write letters ([here’s my address](http://www.aaronsw.com/contact)). I
(amazingly) don’t have any clocks or calendars, so I won’t even know
what time it is. All of which means no more meetings or coordinating to
hang out with people. I suppose people could call on me, but honestly, I
wish they wouldn’t — at least at first.

I don’t feel like the kind of person who could survive on Walden Pond —
I’m a finicky eater and not a huge fan of animals in any capacity. So
locking myself in my apartment seems about as close as I can get. There
will of course be the clerks at stores and people on the street, but for
the most part I’ll be alone.

I’ve experimented with it a little — both my phone and my laptop have
died recently — and it’s liberating. Walking down the street or waiting
in lines, I find myself checking my phone compulsively, using it to send
my mind to some other world of email or news. Without it, I feel
grounded. And my laptop is even worse — a beckoning world of IMs to
friends, [brain-gelatinizing television
shows](http://www.hulu.com/watch/58538/), and an endless pile of emails
to answer. It’s like a constant stream of depression. A day without it
made me feel like I was human again.

I want to be human again. Even if that means isolating myself from the
rest of you humans.

What if there’s an emergency? Has there ever been an emergency? The
biggest urgent things seem to be that my servers go down. Which sucks,
but I need to be able to walk away from that. If you have things hosted
on one of my machines, contact me now and I’ll try to get you enough
privileges that you can fix things if they break. If something’s really
an emergency, I’m sure you’ll find me.

Have a nice June.
