Spreading Lies: How Think Tanks Ignore the Facts
================================================

June 9, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4)

* * * * *

*[This is part 4 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), and [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3).]*

But do the right-wing think tanks even care about the facts? In his
autobiography, *Blinded by the Right*, David Brock describes his
experience being recruited for one right out of college: “Though I had
no advanced degrees, I assumed the grandiose title of John M. Olin
Fellow in Congressional Studies, which, if nothing else, certainly
impressed my parents. … My assignment was to write a monograph, which I
hoped to publish as a book, challenging the conservative orthodoxy on
the proper relationship between the executive and legislative branches
of government.” This topic was chosen, Brock explains, because with “a
squish like Bush in the White House … the political reality [was] that
the conservative agenda could be best advanced by renegade conservatives
on Capitol Hill.” (79f)

Needless to say, paying fresh-faced former college students lots of
money to write articles that serve political needs is not the best way
to get accurate information. But is accurate information the goal? Look
at John Lott, a “resident scholar” at the American Enterprise Institute
— the same right-wing think tank that promoted *The Bell Curve*. Lott’s
book *More Guns, Less Crime* claimed that his scientific studies had
found that passing laws to allow people to carry concealed weapons
actually lowered crime rates. As usual, the evidence melted away upon
investigation, but Lott’s errors were more serious than most.

Not content to simply distort the data, Lott fabricated an entire study
which he claimed showed that in 97% of cases, simply brandishing a gun
would cause an attacker to flee. When Internet critics begun to point
out his inconsistencies on this claim, Lott posted responses under the
name “Mary Rosh” to defend himself. “I have to say that he was the best
professor I ever had,” Lott gushed about himself one Internet posting.
“There were a group of us students who would try to take any class that
he taught. Lott finally had to tell us that it was best for us to try
and take classes from other professors.”

Confronted about his alternate identity, Lott told the *Washington Post*
“I probably shouldn’t have done it — I know I shouldn’t have done it”.
And yet, the very next day he again attacked his critics, this time
under the new pseudonym “Washingtonian”. (It later got so bad that one
of Lott’s pseudonyms would start talking about posts from another Lott
pseudonym.)[†](http://timlambert.org/guns/Lott/)

Lott, of course, is not the only scholar to make things up to bolster
his case. For comparison, look at Michael Bellesiles, author of the
anti-gun book *Arming America*, which argued guns were uncommon in early
America. Other scholars investigated and found that Bellesiles had
probably fabricated evidence. Emory University, where Bellesiles was a
professor of history, begun an investigation into the accuracy of his
work, eventually forcing him to resign. His publisher, Knopf, pulled the
book out of print. Libraries pulled the book off their shelves. Columbia
University revoked the Bancroft Prize the book had been awarded. The
scandal was widely covered in academic circles. Bellesiles was firmly
disgraced and has not shown his face in public since.

And what happened to Lott? Nothing. Lott remains a “resident scholar” at
the American Enterprise Institute, his book continues to sell well, his
op-ed pieces are still published in major papers, and he gives talks
around the country.[†](http://timlambert.org/guns/Lott/) For the
right-wing scholar, even outright fraud is no serious obstacle.

*Next:* [Part 5: Saving Business](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5)
