Consciousness Clarified
=======================

August 1, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/conclar)

* * * * *

You ever notice how when you learn a new word you begin seeing it used
everywhere? Lately I’ve been feeling that way about consciousness. I
knew the word before, obviously, but lately I’ve clarified my thoughts
about what it *is* and sloppy usage of the term sticks out like a sore
thumb.

“Consciousness”, the dictionary kindly explains, is “the state or
condition of being conscious.” And we all basically know what it means
to be conscious. You poke someone awake and ask “Are you conscious?” You
get hit on the head by a large rock and you get knocked unconscious.
Being conscious, in short, means being awake, being aware of your
surroundings, seeing colors and feeling pinches and hearing songs.

Now there’s something weird about being conscious — something so weird,
in fact, that I’ve found many people are bizarrely tempted to deny it.
Consciousness is what the philosopher John Searle calls “ontologically
subjective”. That is, when you see the color red, while it’s true that
all sorts of complicated things happen in your eyes and brains, a
particular experience — the one we call “seeing red” — happens only to
you. If aliens with the most powerful viewing technology possible beamed
down to earth and peeked inside your brain, they’d still have no idea
what the color red looked like. They’d see that a certain wavelength of
light triggered certain electrical impulses in certain centers, but
they’d never see *red*. It’s just not there.

Now we don’t know for sure what *causes* consciousness (it’s an ongoing
research project) but whatever the answer is, it must be caused by
*something*. Yet this obvious fact is continually missed by laypeople
who make bizarre comments like “as soon as computers become self-aware,
they might become conscious”.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ This is as absurd as saying
that as soon as computers are told about food, they might start
digesting things.

Consciousness isn’t some vague property of things that look smart to us.
It has a real, physical meaning: feeling things. I suppose it’s
logically possible that a talking robot might start feeling things, but
the chances seem awfully remote.

* * * * *

1.  Example: [This week’s *New York Times
    Magazine*](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/07/29/magazine/29robots-t.html?pagewanted=all)
    suggests “a robot might exhibit the first glimmers of consciousness,
    ‘namely, the reflexive ability of a mind to examine itself over its
    own shoulder.’” [↩](#fnref:fn1)


