Sick
====

November 27, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/verysick)

* * * * *

I’m sorry I haven’t been keeping up with Bubble City. I’ve spent a lot
of the last few weeks lying in bed and drinking fluids. (With occasional
breaks to play Rock Band, much to the annoyance of my neighbors.) Once
again, I’ve been sick — this time, with four different illnesses.

I have a lot of illnesses. I don’t talk about it much, for a variety of
reasons. I feel ashamed to have an illness. (It sounds absurd, but there
still is an enormous stigma around being sick.) I don’t want to use
being ill as an excuse. (Although I sometimes wonder how much more
productive I’d be if I wasn’t so sick.) And, to a large extent, I just
don’t find it an interesting subject. (My friends are amazed by this;
why is such a curious person so uncurious about the things so directly
affecting his life?)

One of my goals for this blog is to describe what it’s like to be in
various situations and it struck me that I’ve never said much about what
it’s like to be sick. So I figured I’d try to remedy that.
(Unfortunately, being sick has made this slightly more difficult. I
started this post on thanksgiving and now it’s almost four days later.)

**Cold:** All the time I feel tired and woozy. My throat is sore and I’m
constantly searching for kleenex to address my nose. Sometimes I feel
too hot, like I’m burning up. I’m always thirsty. Concentrating on
anything is difficult. I just feel kind of wasted.

**Upset stomach:** Huge pains grind through my stomach, like it’s trying
to leap out of my body. Food is always followed by pain, followed by
running to the bathroom. I’m afraid to go out because I wouldn’t want to
get too far from a toilet. I’m always thirsty and the dehydration makes
me angry and confused. At times the pain is excruciating and even after
it goes I spend some time just reeling from it.

**Migraine:** Ever felt someone’s nails dig into your scalp? Imagine
that their nails are knives and they’re scratching thru your brain and
you can begin to imagine what a migraine feels like. Light, sound, touch
— everything makes it worse, making the most painful pains even more
painful. Even when you quell it with a pill, you still end up feeling
woozy and disconnected, as if the pill is just barely keeping the pain
at bay.

**Depressed mood:** Surely there have been times when you’ve been sad.
Perhaps a loved one has abandoned you or a plan has gone horribly awry.
Your face falls. Perhaps you cry. You feel worthless. You wonder whether
it’s worth going on. Everything you think about seems bleak — the things
you’ve done, the things you hope to do, the people around you. You want
to lie in bed and keep the lights off. Depressed mood is like that, only
it doesn’t come for any reason and it doesn’t go for any either. Go
outside and get some fresh air or cuddle with a loved one and you don’t
feel any better, only more upset at being unable to feel the joy that
everyone else seems to feel. Everything gets colored by the sadness.

At best, you tell yourself that your thinking is irrational, that it is
simply a mood disorder, that you should get on with your life. But
sometimes that is worse. You feel as if streaks of pain are running
through your head, you thrash your body, you search for some escape but
find none. And this is one of the more moderate forms. [As George
Scialabba put
it](http://www.bu.edu/agni/essays-reviews/print/2003/57-scialabba.html),
“acute depression does not feel like falling ill, it feels like being
tortured … the pain is not localized; it runs along every nerve, an
unconsuming fire. … Even though one knows better, one cannot believe
that it will ever end, or that anyone else has ever felt anything like
it.”

The economist Richard Layard, after advocating that the goal of public
policy should be to maximize happiness, set out to learn what the
greatest impediment to happiness was today. His conclusion: depression.
Depression causes nearly half of all disability, it affects one in six,
and explains more current unhappiness than poverty. And (important for
public policy) Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy has a short-term success
rate of 50%. Sadly, depression (like other mental illnesses, especially
addiction) is not seen as “real” enough to deserve the investment and
awareness of conditions like breast cancer (1 in 8) or AIDS (1 in 150).
And there is, of course, the shame.

* * * * *

So I hope you’ll forgive me for not doing more. And hey, it could be
worse. At least I have decent health insurance.
