Lean into the pain
==================

September 1, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dalio)

* * * * *

*This post is part four of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

When you first begin to exercise, it’s somewhat painful. Not wildly
painful, like touching a hot stove, but enough that if your only goal
was to avoid pain, you certainly would stop doing it. But if you keep
exercising… well, it just keeps getting more painful. When you’re done,
if you’ve really pushed yourself, you often feel exhausted and sore. And
the next morning it’s even worse.

If that was all that happened, you’d probably never do it. It’s not that
much fun being sore. Yet we do it anyway — because we know that, in the
long run, the pain will make us stronger. Next time we’ll be able to run
harder and lift more before the pain starts.

And knowing this makes all the difference. Indeed, we come to see the
pain as a sort of pleasure — it feels good to really push yourself, to
fight through the pain and make yourself stronger. Feel the burn! It’s
fun to wake up sore the next morning, because you know that’s just a
sign that you’re getting stronger.

Few people realize it, but psychological pain works the same way. Most
people treat psychological pain like the hot stove — if starting to
think about something scares them or stresses them out, they quickly
stop thinking about it and change the subject.

The problem is that the topics that are most painful also tend to be the
topics that are most important for us: they’re the projects we most want
to do, the relationships we care most about, the decisions that have the
biggest consequences for our future, the most dangerous risks that we
run. We’re scared of them because we know the stakes are so high. But if
we never think about them, then we can never do anything about them.

Ray Dalio writes:

> It is a fundamental law of nature that to evolve one has to push one’s
> limits, which is painful, in order to gain strength—whether it’s in
> the form of lifting weights, facing problems head-on, or in any other
> way. Nature gave us pain as a messaging device to tell us that we are
> approaching, or that we have exceeded, our limits in some way. At the
> same time, nature made the process of getting stronger require us to
> push our limits. Gaining strength is the adaptation process of the
> body and the mind to encountering one’s limits, which is painful. In
> other words, both pain and strength typically result from encountering
> one’s barriers. When we encounter pain, we are at an important
> juncture in our decision-making process.^[1](#fn:d)^

Yes it’s painful, but the trick is to make that mental shift. To realize
that the pain isn’t something awful to be postponed and avoided, but a
signal that you’re getting stronger — something to savor and enjoy. It’s
what makes you better.

Pretty soon, when you start noticing something that causes you psychic
pain, you’ll get excited about it, not afraid. *Ooh, another chance to
get stronger.* You’ll seek out things you’re scared of and intentionally
confront them, because it’s an easy way to get the great rewards of
self-improvement. Dalio suggests thinking of each one as a puzzle,
inside of which is embedded a beautiful gem. If you fight through the
pain to solve the puzzle, you unlock it and get to keep the gem.

The trick is: when you start feeling that psychological pain coming on,
don’t draw back from it and cower — lean into it. Lean into the pain.

* * * * *

In agile software development, there’s a phrase: If it hurts, do it more
often.^[2](#fn:f)^

For example, imagine Jane and Joan are working on a software project
together. They both have a copy of the code; Jane is making the error
messages friendlier while Joan is adding a new feature. They both work
on their task for days and days until it’s finally done. Now they face a
problem: they need to *merge* their different changes back together.

Maybe you’ve had this problem, either with code or with text documents:
you send a draft of a report to two friends, both suggest different
changes, and you have to merge all their changes back into the original
document. It’s incredibly annoying — and doing it with software is way
worse. So people put it off. Jane thinks “you know, let me just make the
thank you messages a little nicer before we merge” and Joan thinks “you
know, let me add just one more feature before we merge”.

They keep putting the merge off, and every time they do the task gets
bigger and more painful. But they have to do it eventually. By then, the
merge is so big that it takes days of painstaking work just to piece
together the already-written code. It’s an arduous, painful process —
which makes Joan and Jane just want to put it off even longer next time.

The agile approach, however, is to do the opposite: merging hurts, so
we’ll do it more often. Instead of merging every couple weeks, or every
couple months, we’ll merge every single day, or every couple hours. Even
if Jane and Joan aren’t even close to finished with their work, they’ll
check in what they have so far (maybe with some special code
deactivating it until it’s finished) so they don’t end up in merge hell
later on. These very small merges tend not to be painful at all, they’re
so easy that you hardly even notice.

The same principle shows up all across software development: from
testing to releasing, your natural inclination is to put off painful
things, when doing them more often actually is much easier.

And I don’t think it’s limited to software. I think the same principle
would work even if, for some odd reason, you were required to touch a
hot stove for an hour. Procrastinating and putting it off until you had
no choice but to hold your hand to the stove for a full hour would end
up being very painful. But if you did it in small frequent bits, just
quick taps of the stove with your finger that eventually added up to an
hour, it wouldn’t be so bad at all. Again, the trick is not to run from
the pain.

* * * * *

Of all the self-improvement tricks I’ve learned, this one was by far the
most surprising — and by far the most impactful. I spent most of my life
hemmed in by my talents. I knew I had strengths and weaknesses and it
just seemed obvious I should find jobs that fit my strengths. It seemed
crazy to take a job that probed my weaknesses.

Sure, there were somethings, over there, that I wished I was better at,
but they seemed so far away. Meanwhile, there were lots of things over
here that I was good at. Why not just keep doing them? Sure, I realized
intellectually that [I could get
better](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck) at the other stuff, but it
hardly seemed worth the pain of trying.

I’d learned [not to shrink from hard
truths](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis), so I’d literally have
this conversation with myself: “Yes, I know: if I got better at selling
things to people [or whatever it was], I’d be much better off. But look
at how painful I find selling: just thinking about it makes me want to
run and hide! Sure, it’d be great if I could do it, but is it really
worth all that pain?”

Now I realize this is a bogus argument: it’s not that the pain is so bad
that it makes me flee, it’s that the importance of the topic triggers a
fight-or-flight reaction deep in my reptile brain. If instead of
thinking of it as a scary subject to avoid, I think of it as an exciting
opportunity to get better, then it’s no longer a cost-benefit tradeoff
at all: both sides are a benefit — I get the benefits of being good at
selling and the fun of getting better at something.

Do this enough times and your whole outlook on life begins to change.
It’s no longer a scary world, hemming you in, but an exciting one full
of exciting adventures to pursue.^[3](#fn:s)^

Tackling something big like this is terrifying; it’s far too much to
start with. It’s always better to start small. What’s something you’ve
been avoiding thinking about? It can be anything — a relationship
difficulty, a problem at work, something on your todo list you’ve been
avoiding. Call it to mind — despite the pain it brings — and just sort
of let it sit there. Acknowledge that thinking about it is painful and
feel good about yourself for being able to do it anyway. Feel it
becoming less painful as you force yourself to keep thinking about it.
See, you’re getting stronger!

OK, take a break. But when you’re ready, come back to it, and start
thinking of concrete things you can do about it. See how it’s not as
scary as you thought? See how good it feels to actually do something
about it?

Next time you start feeling that feeling, that sense of pain from deep
in your head that tells you to avoid a subject — ignore it. Lean into
the pain instead. You’ll be glad you did.

**Next in this series:** [Confront
reality](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/anders)

* * * * *

1.  Ray Dalio,
    *[Principles](http://www.bwater.com/Uploads/FileManager/Principles/Bridgewater-Associates-Ray-Dalio-Principles.pdf)*
    (2001), part 2 ([visited
    2012-09-01](http://www.webcitation.org/6ALtkRMHB)). This whole
    section was inspired by his argument. [↩](#fnref:d)

2.  I first heard this phrase at a ThoughtWorks training. See also
    Martin Fowler,
    “[FrequencyReducesDifficulty](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/FrequencyReducesDifficulty.html),”
    *Bliki* (28 July 2011). [↩](#fnref:f)

3.  See, for example, Derek Sivers, “[Push, push, push. Expanding your
    comfort zone](http://sivers.org/comfort),” *sivers.org* (13 August
    2012). [↩](#fnref:s)


