SFP: The Spirit Inside
======================

July 5, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/july4)

* * * * *

The sun has set leaving the street lights to cast everything in an eerie
yellow glow. People from all over the city leave their houses, joining
the growing mass that has taken over the streets carless streets. As the
group passes darkened empty buildings, old men stand by the side of the
road selling colored luminences. An orchestral soundtrack begins to fade
up.

As the group nears the river, the actual size of the proceedings becomes
apparent. The entire riverside and its attached street has become
inhabited, people bustling back and forth, setting up shop on various
patches of grass, laughing and talking. The orchestral score grows
louder, coming from a hulking monolith in the sky.

The tune becomes recognizable as the 1812 Overture, reaching its finale.
People begin to gasp and point to the other side of the river. ‘What’s
going on?’ asks Simon. Before I can reply light begins to shoot out from
the ground up to the sky, exploding in a luminous pattern that leaves
shards of fire and smoke lingering in the sky.

The music stops.

‘And that was the world-famous Boston Pops playing their signature
piece, the 1812 Overture,’ reports a perky female voice from the
loudspeaker. ‘And a little taste of the fireworks that are yet to come,’
adds the male. ‘In just a moment we’ll be joined by the national
audience, so stay tuned to the Boston Pops 4th of July Fireworks
Spectacular on CBS!’

Simon and I find a spot on the grass to sit down as the loudspeaker
encourages us to support our corporate and governmental masters. Members
of the military are praised for their service. (Even as popular support
for the war continues to dwindle, it’s comforting to see that at least
the major television networks will support our babykillers.^[1](#fn:1)^)
‘And tonight’s fireworks display is presented commercial free for the
first time through the generosity of Liberty Mutual. Why don’t you all
show how much you appreciate Liberty Mutual?’ asks the loudspeaker. The
crowd, who I didn’t even think was listening, loudly thanks Liberty
Mutual.

The orchestra prepares us for the show with a medley of American songs,
ranging from “Yankee Doodle Dandy” to “YMCA” (which we all do the hand
motions for, except Simon). Then, for the TV audience, they present [an
incredibly awful](http://www.ouramerica2005.com/) combination of
combination of country music, hollowed rhetoric, and false patriotism.

But soon enough the fireworks begin and they are indeed spectacular. I
can’t say I’m up on my fireworks but the show is much
better-choreographed and impressive than everything I’d seen at home.
The show lasted nearly half an hour with numerous tunes played, the best
being U2’s “Vertigo”, during which large cubes appeared in the sky
precisely as they counted off. I also saw smiley faces, supernovae, and
an odd sort of color package. Technology!

And then, our eardrums battered, the whole thing exploded in a finale
that lit up the entire sky. And then we all walked home. It’s nice
living just a block away from the most spectacular fireworks display in
the galaxy.

* * * * *

1.  I have no problem with the troops as people — I’m sure there as good
    as anyone — but it wasn’t the people that the media was supporting.
    They were suggesting the job itself was praiseworthy; it’s
    not. [↩](#fnref:1)


