Hurting Seniors: The Attack on Social Security
==============================================

June 11, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6)

* * * * *

*[This is part 6 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4), and [part
five](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5).]*

Recent events provide a compelling case study of how this process works.
Conservatives have wanted to get rid of Social Security for years. The
most successful anti-poverty program in history, it clearly shows how
the government can be used to help people — anathema to conservative
ideology. Now, with a secure lock on government, is their time to
strike. As a White House deputy wrote in a memo that was later leaked,
“For the first time in six decades, the Social Security battle is one we
can win — and in doing so, we can help transform the political and
philosophical landscape of the
country.”[†](http://www.j-bradford-delong.net/movable_type/2005-3_archives/000119.html)

There’s extremely strong public support for Social Security —
conservatives could certainly never just come out and say they wanted to
end it — so their plan is to deceive the public: First, persuade people
that Social Security is facing some sort of crisis and won’t be around
for the next generation. Second, convince them to begin replacing Social
Security with a privatized version. Privatization, the logic goes, will
naturally keep increasing until all of Social Security is eliminated.
The only problem is that Social Security isn’t facing a crisis and any
form of privatization, which would require both paying out to existing
retirees and saving away money for the private accounts of the current
generation, would worsen whatever financial problems Social Security
does have.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-cnn-social-security.html)

But think tanks have been preparing for this moment for years, floating
privatization plans and doing their best to persuade the media that
Social Security was in imminent danger. So when the Bush administration
started up their anti-Social Security campaign, the media knew exactly
what to say.

CBS, for example, presented a segment featuring man-on-the-street Tad
DeHaven. “I don’t expect to get anything from Social Security, OK?” said
young DeHaven. “It’s not going to be there—that’s my assumption.”
DeHaven had good reason to say these things: for years, he’s been one of
the leading Republican activists in the fight to get rid of Social
Security. CBS never mentioned the
connection.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-cnn-social-security.html)

A later CBS report boosted fears that Social Security was going bankrupt
by displaying a graphic on the screen that read “2042: Insolvent = 0
benefits??” [*sic*] (“In 2042, Social Security will become insolvent,
and today’s young workers risk losing their benefits,” a voiceover
explained.) But this just isn’t true: even the pessimistic Social
Security Administration concedes that by 2042 Social Security will be
able to pay nearly 80% of scheduled benefits, which is still far more
than what it pays out
today.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/cbs-social-security-update.html)

Other networks were no better. NBC’s report feature quotes from Bush
saying the system would go “flat bust” and an interview with a Heritage
Foundation scholar — identified only as a “social security expert” — but
allowed no critics to contradict their
claims.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/nbc-socialsecurity.html)
Meanwhile, an ABC report claimed “One thing everyone agrees on, the
Social Security system as it exists now won’t be able to afford those
payments for long after the Wilsons retire.” In fact, it’s quite the
opposite: even the most pessimistic predictions say that Social Security
will be fine until the Wilsons are statistically dead. Again, no critics
got got a
voice.[†](http://www.fair.org/activism/abc-socialsecurity.html)

*Next:* Part 7: [Fighting Back](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting7)
