Investigative Strike Teams
==========================

April 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ist)

* * * * *

Journalists get mad at bloggers: “Without real reporting, they’d have
nothing to comment on!” Bloggers get mad at journalists: “There’s a
reason nobody reads newspapers anymore. They’re dry and dull and wrong.”
But the gap is shrinking: bloggers are doing more real reporting,
journalists are getting more humanized (with all the digressions,
opinions, and biases that entails).

So what if you paired an investigative reporter with a blogger?
Reporters didn’t used to write their own stories. (Why would a good
investigator be a good writer?) The reporter would be out in the field,
knocking on doors and taking notes, which they’d hand to a writer at a
desk, who would turn them into a coherent, vivid story. (*Newsweek*
still operates this way.)

Replace the writer with a blogger. They’d post the story as it unfolded,
capturing the excitement of discovery: the big breaks, the wrong turns,
the moment when it all comes together. Like any talented blogger, they’d
keep people coming back: *What happens next? I want to know more!*
They’d keep up a conversation with readers and other bloggers, sharing
new leads with the reporter. It’d be a powerful duo.

But blogging isn’t everything. You also want to recap the story so far:
for those just tuning in, here are the characters, here’s what’s
happened, here’s why it’s important. Keep a summary article alongside
the blog and update it in tandem. It would lay out the whole story in
one place, with links to particular posts or source documents for more
information. That way everyone can always get an overview of the bigger
picture — including the reporters.

You’ll also want a tech person around to help out. Many stories involve
databases; you need someone to work with the reporter to parse and
process the data, then work with the blogger to put the results online.
And there are plenty of other times where a small program or some tech
knowledge comes in handy.

And you’ll need a lawyer on staff. Getting information isn’t easy.
You’ll need someone who can file FOIA lawsuits and respond to legal
threats. Maybe you can even file lawsuits against corporate malefactors
and obtain documents in discovery. Then work with *pro bono* lawyers or
public interest law firms to win the lawsuit in its own right.

Lawsuits are needed because modern investigations can’t stop at
publication. If there was an era when a front page *Times* story could
stop a scandal, that era is over. Ending abuses requires action. This
makes traditional journalists uncomfortable. They see their job as
reporting the facts, not changing them.

We may always need the detached journalist interested only in The Truth,
but there’s room for more. Just as journalism needs to become more
humanized, it needs to become more activist. Journalists uncover
outrageous things, which gets people outraged, but they seem to think
channeling that outrage into something productive is someone else’s
responsibility.

Instead, a good investigative team needs a political organizer. They can
build an email list of people who get outraged by their reporting and
use it, along with blogs and the lists of other political groups, to put
pressure on the bad guys, fundraise for further journalism, and collect
a team of volunteers. The volunteers can help with aspects of the
reporting — a modern investigation can get much further by crowdsourcing
certain tricky aspects and depending on talented volunteers for
particular tasks. A good political organizer knows how to get and manage
volunteers.

But to make your organizing maximally effective, you’ll need (gasp!) a
lobbyist. They’ll meet with representatives to encourage them to hold
hearings based on stories you’re working on, where they can subpoena
documents and testimony. They’ll ask representatives to introduce bills
to address the abuses you’ve uncovered and work with them on legislative
strategy to get those bills passed. And they’ll team up with the
political organizer to get constituents writing to their representatives
in favor of these bills.

The only way to get good at something is deliberate practice: trying
various things and seeing how they work. But when it comes to making
change, that’s very hard to do. Change requires so many people and takes
so long that it’s almost impossible to say for sure that your doing X
helped accomplish Y. Which means that it becomes very easy to fool
yourself into thinking you’re more effective than you are.

But if you have one team — some reporters, a blogger/writer, a techie, a
lawyer, an organizer, and a lobbyist — together, they form an
investigative strike team: uncovering corruption, exposing it, and
effecting change. They can watch the whole process unfold from a
reporter’s suspicion to a writer’s story to a legislative fix. And they
can get better at it. It’d be a powerful combination. That’s the kind of
future-of-news that I want to see.
