What do startup founders want?
==============================

August 5, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfwants)

* * * * *

[日本語](http://www.yamdas.org/column/technique/sfwantsj.html)

To oversimplify greatly for a second:

People in New York want money. People in Los Angeles want fame. People
in DC want power. People in Miami want to have fun. But what do people
in San Francisco want?

It’s not money. Sure, a startup that sells for a lot of money is nice,
but it’s clearly not the goal. I think few startup founders would feel
good about building something worthless and then tricking a big company
into buying it for a lot of money.

It’s not fame. Sure, Mark Zuckerberg is famous now, but he actually
seems more annoyed about that than anything.

It’s not power, or else the founders of GitHub would look ridiculous for
giving all their power away to their employees. Paul Buchheit didn’t
write Gmail because he wanted to control the actions of its users.

It’s certainly not having fun. (Although, like most hard things,
startups are actually surprisingly fun.)

No, I think the thing startup founders want is *importance*.

Importance is a bit like power, but heavily diluted. Power is about
being able to make people do something they wouldn’t otherwise do. The
Instagram founders weren’t in it for power: they have very little
interest in making people take photos they wouldn’t otherwise take. But
nonetheless, their decisions had a great deal of importance for their
users. If they decided to put ads in their app or remove a favorite
filter, millions of people’s lives suddenly get a little bit more
annoying.

Because your tiny decisions have huge impacts on people, when you’re
important everyone wants to hear what you have to say. You can go to TED
and WEF and the audience wants to come up to talk to you, not so much
because they want something from you, but because what you think has a
big impact on their lives.

This is why selling a startup is so hard. It gets you money and fame but
it means losing a lot of your importance. Now when you go to TED, you’re
a has-been; you just answer questions about what the good old days are
like.

Importance is different from impact. Tim Berners-Lee (inventor of the
Web) had a huge impact in the world, but he’s not particularly
important. He decided long ago that the Semantic Web was the next big
thing, but few people cared, because practically there was very little
he could actually do about it.

Dick Costolo (CEO of Twitter), by contrast, is pretty important. If he
decides that Twitter needs a “consistent user experience”, he can shut
down apps millions of people use each day, destroying the companies that
build them.

We all know the dangers of wanting money or power. But the dangers of
wanting importance are little-discussed. Importance tends to require
centralizing things, which means restraining innovation and leaving
yourself open to the demands of actual power.

Imagine Tim had built the Web the same way folks built Twitter. All our
web pages would be would be hosted by a single company, accessed through
an API that they defined and could change at whim. Web applications
would be far weaker than they are today (since it would be hard to store
anything interesting on TimCo’s servers) and powerful corporations would
constantly be knocking people offline permanently for various
terms-of-service violations (no trademark infringement! no hate
speech!).

Tim would be much more important in this world, but I don’t think the
rest of us would be better off.
