Bubble City: Chapter 11
=======================

December 14, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity11)

* * * * *

Jason was a man on the run: Google, with their paws in every phone and
PC from here to China, was looking for him. Visiting his friends was out
of the question; Google surely had all of them under surveillance. And
calling or emailing them was dangerous too. You never knew when they had
a Google-powered phone or forwarded their email to a Gmail account
(which lots of people did now just for spam filtering). But what if he
didn’t share anything private? He could at least send a message through
Tor telling his friends what had happened.

The library was closing soon, so he hurriedly composed an email for
Sarah:

> Dear Sarah,
>
> I know what I’m going to say will make you think I’ve gone even
> farther off the deep-end than I already have, but it’s my best shot. I
> found a backdoor in a popular algorithm and now Google is out to get
> me. I have to hide out for the moment, but so far I’m OK. Please make
> sure my friends and folks at the office don’t get too worried about
> me.
>
> I can’t check my email without giving myself away, so if you want to
> write back, purchase a classified ad in the *New York Times* — use the
> word “Sarton”.
>
> Missing you,
>
> Jason

There, that ought to be at least a start. This way at least Sarah would
know what was up and he’d have a safe channel for hearing back from
Sarah. Never any harm in having another channel for information, right?

Jason bought himself a pillow and spent the night sleeping with some
homeless people in a little cranny near the library that they claimed
each night. They had turned the unused nook into their own little
community, gabbing and singing and dancing until late, before curling up
in a dark place in a sleeping bag that looked like it had been left out
for several decades and turning in for the night. One by one, each of
them disappeared to curl up and Jason joined them. By the time the sun
and streetsweepers and cars awoke him the next morning, they were all
gone, as if their little homeless community had never happened in the
first place.

Jason looked out over the world just waking up — cars driving to work
before the rush hour traffic hit, a couple people scurrying by, shops
getting ready to open their doors — and felt like the world was full of
possibility. He stretched out and began walking into its gloriously
bright morning before he realized it wasn’t.

* * * * *

Trent knew that staying on top of the business world meant staying on
top of what was happening. So he grabbed an intern and headed to The
Butler and the Chef, a South Park restaurant for one of his espionage
breakfasts. Corporate executives from all over town came here to have
lunch and do deals and Trent made sure he stayed on top of what they
were doing by taking regular chances to come here and eavesdrop on their
conversations.

Of course, he knew that others were eavesdropping on his own, which is
why he brought along the intern: disinformation. “So, uh, what secret
projects are you working on, Trent?” said the intern in a stage voice.
“I’m glad you asked,” Trent replied. “Things at Newsflip have never been
more exciting. In fact, *don’t tell anyone this*, but we’re in the
middle of acquisition talks.”

“Really?” the intern said, looking a bit worried. “I hadn’t heard that —
with who?” “With whom,” Trent corrected. “With whom?” “Well, I’m not at
liberty to say. But let’s just say it rhymes with boo-gull.” “Wow,” said
the intern, genuinely worried now. “For how much?” “Oh come on,” Trent
said laughing, “you know I can’t disclose that.” “Oh, but just a hint?”
“Well, if you insist… It’s somewhere between \$200 million and \$201
million. A-ha-ha-ha.” The intern, knowing his options wouldn’t vest
unless he managed to keep his job for another six months, looked down at
his soup.

* * * * *

Wayne was having trouble sleeping. He showed up at his office looking
even more disheveled than usual. Even his assistant, who had taken to
spending the days chatting with friends on the phone and watching
YouTube videos, noticed something was up. “Something wrong, sir?” she
asked. Wayne mumbled and shuffled into his office.

It was this damn issue of the kid. Wayne knew, rationally, that it was
all for the best, but in his heart it just felt wrong to him. He felt
like he ought to use his influence to do something. But what could he
do? Why, he’d talk about it on his show, of course — Google money be
damned. He set up the video camera and began thinking about what he was
going to say.

“I know I’ve been a supporter of Google in the past,” he’d started. “But
I think they’ve finally crossed the line.”

He looked at himself in the video preview. His shirt was askew and his
hair in wild clumps standing up from his head. Everything looked badly
wrinkled.

“I’ve recently received information that they are chasing and
persecuting a young kid just beca—”

He looked into his own eyes on the monitor. And then he shut off the
camera. Nobody would believe him. He didn’t have any evidence. And he
certainly didn’t look credible. And then what? Google would go after him
— not only take away the nice office and the pretty assistant, but drag
his name through the mud. And God knows what they’d do to his search
results. Wayne shuddered to think of it.

No, he needed to work this from the inside. Get more information at the
very least. He put in a call to Samuel.

* * * * *

Sarah read over the email. Then she paused and read it again. And then
she freaked out.

* * * * *

“Hey, Samuel,” Wayne said. “Wayne, good to hear from you, what’s up?”
“Oh, I was just calling to talk about asking if I could come see some
Google people I wanted to talk to.” “Umm,” Samuel said. “What do you
mean?” “Well, you know that story you were telling me the other night,
you know the story about the kid?” “I don’t know what you’re talking
about, Wayne.” “Come on, the other night, at the bar, when you were
telling me about the kid you wanted to take o—” “Wayne, don’t be silly —
I was just kidding around about that stuff.” Samuel laughed. “Heh, you
took me seriously? Come on. You really think a company like this would
do stuff like that. Give me a break! Anyway, if you want the real story
you should just come by the offices sometime.” “Oh. Uh, okay. How about
today?” “Oh, well, umm, I guess that works. What time?” “Let’s say
around 3?” “Sure, come on by.” “Great, see you then.” “Great, bye.”
“Bye.”

* * * * *

Jason was upset. He was letting his emotional mind get the best of him —
hanging out with homeless people on the street and at the library,
writing letters to Sarah. He needed to think rationally. He needed
coffee.

He spent some of his little remaining cash on a large cup of coffee and
stole a newspaper from behind a register so he could diagram his
situation on it.

Here’s how it is: Google was using NNA to control the news. He’d found
out about this. Google had found out about him. Google didn’t want
people to know, so they were trying to stop him. He was trying to stop
Google.

The solution was obvious: he just needed to use the backdoor to tell
everyone about what he’d discovered and how Google had been chasing him.
Proving it would be hard but the fact that he could control the news to
force his story to the top would probably be proof enough. Google would
try to shut things down, of course, but that would only draw more
attention. There’s nothing Internet geeks hate more than having stuff
shut down.

So he just needed to use Tor to launch another exploit on the backdoor.
It’d probably require a few tries to get right and he’d have to be very
careful about covering his tracks and moving around, but it seemed
doable.

He was just about to fold up the newspaper when he spotted the
classifieds. He figured he might as well check for a note from Sarah. He
scrolled thru them, looking for the word Sarton. Then he found it:

> Dear Sarton, use your powers and say goodbye to the girl. Love, G.

*Shit,* he thought.

* * * * *

Back at the office, Trent ran down his list of priorities. Being the
boss meant there was just too much to do and far too little time to do
it, so Trent had developed a system. Actually, he hadn’t really
developed a system, he’d bought one that had come highly recommended.
And he didn’t practice it so much as give it to his assistant and order
her to do it.

She’d come back and insisted that she couldn’t actually do it all by
herself, that there were things like RAM dumps and reviews that only he
could really practice. “Oh, alright,” he said, “I’ll do the reviews. How
do I do that?” And she’d explained that once a week he needed to blah
blah blah, anyway, he just knew it was important to go over his
priorities and see how well he was doing at all of them.

“Spreadsheets” — he’d gotten those all off. “Boost morale” — his
meetings had almost certainly done that. “Welcome new guy” — oh yeah,
where was the new guy. He recalled him sitting over… hmm, his seat was
empty. He headed over, deciding to take a hands-on approach. “Hey,
anyone seen the new guy?” “Nah, he’s been working odd hours the past few
days.” “Hmm, well I guess I did say he could work from home. Hey, what’s
that your working on?” “Oh, uh, nothing.” “No, come on, bring that
window back, I want to see it.” “Umm, uh, yeah, here it is.” “Wow, this
looks great — I just have a few comments. This whole sidebar needs to be
purple and instead of a list of news stories this should show the blog
posts with the number of comments. And each one should have a little
picture — pictures are key; they draw attention.” “Um, right — yeah, I
guess so.” “Glad we’re on the same page — I’ll see you later.”

Trent headed back to his desk and called over his assistant. “Sandy,” he
said. “Tell Jane to meet me in my meditation chamber.” “Yes, sir,” she
said, and Trent watched as she rushed back towards her desk. He grabbed
the bag under his desk and headed to the meditation chamber. God, he
loved running a company.

* * * * *

Wayne got in his car and headed down the long Bay Area highways toward
Mountain View. He passed offices and billboards, trees and curving
streets, HOV lanes and overpasses. But eventually he ended up in what
could have been its own small city, a maze of office buildings and
little poorly-signed streets. At the center of it all was the famed
Building 42 complex, with its volleyball courts and dinosaur skeletons
and huge cafeterias, and sexy colorful architecture. But radiating out
from that were increasingly drab gray buildings separated by large
streets and parking lots where they kept all the real employees, the
people who stayed up into 3 in the morning to make sure that the Java
code that drew the sidebars of help pages worked properly.

As Google had built more and more projects, they needed an increasing
number of these grunt-work programmers. They had started interviewing
just about everyone CS graduate, in the hopes of filtering out the good
ones and luring them here to their artificial wonderland in Mountain
View.

Wayne headed for the lobby.

*Next year:* [Chapter 12](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity12)
