The Awfulness of College Lectures
=================================

October 3, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/awfullectures)

* * * * *

*What do the children of privilege do when not engaging in conspicuous
consumption while [wearing fashionable
clothes](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fashionnotes)? Why attend class,
of course! This bizarre, yet widespread, affectation seemed intriguing
enough that I decided to pursue a further investigation in my inimitable
“first-person snob” style.*

The Harvard students sit patiently outside the lecture hall as they wait
for the previous class to end. Many simply sit, but others, showing the
go-get-it-ness that got them into Harvard, begin attempting conversation
with their neighbors. The awkward situation shows through in the awkward
conversation (which, no doubt, they will learn to smooth over as they
get older) about superficial topics of schoolwork (never school content,
of course).

As the previous class exits, we file in and take our seats. Gabbing
continues somewhat for a while until, all of a sudden, as if by some
mysterious consensus, it completely silences. The professor seems
surprised too. “Well, uh, it got quiet all of a sudden,” he says
haltingly, “so I guess I better start talking.” For a professor in
social psychology, you think he’d show a little more interest.

He begins the lecture in the standard way since PowerPoint: a title
slide (with a cute illustration), a table of contents slide (which he
walks through interminably slowly), and then a series of chunks of text
and illustrations, which he walks through one by one. It’s so bad it
makes we want to tear my hair out. The content is largely superficial;
the presentation is unnaturally slow. (We literally spend a good five
minutes talking about a specific gross-out gag.)

But while this may be an extreme version of it, at its essence, this is
the college lecture. Someone who (we’ll give them the benefit of the
doubt) is quite smart appearing stupid for fifty minutes so that they
can communicate basic facts to kids “at their level”. Edward Tufte
teaches us to always ask about the information density of a method of
communication. The information communicated in this lecture could have
fit on one side of a single piece of paper.

There was a camera in the back of the hall, presumably recording the
proceedings. But had this been available online, I doubt I could have
forced myself to watch it. (The other day someone asked me why more
people don’t watch the recordings of MIT lectures made available for
free online. This is why.) The only reason the lecture is tolerable at
all is because there’s something captivating about being in the presence
of another human being, regardless of what they’re saying. But it
doesn’t seem like that communicates anything additional — whether you
see the guy in person or watch him at home, he’s still saying the same
stuff. And so when you watch him at home, there’s just not much there.

So if what he’s saying isn’t very interesting, why do we subject
ourselves to it? How did this become the primary method of education?
Why do kids paid tens of thousands of dollars, in large part to fly
someplace else to see someone say something they would have been bored
to watch at home?

Back at Harvard, as I walk out of the class I hear the students gabbing.
“Wow, I’m so glad I took this class,” one says. “That was the best
lecture I’ve ever been in.”
