The Invention of Objectivity
============================

October 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/newobjectivity)

* * * * *

Big media pundits are always wringing their hands about how upstart
partisan bloggers are destroying the neutral objectivity our country was
founded on. (If there’s one thing pundits love to do, it’s
hand-wringing.) Without major papers giving everyone an objective view
of the facts, they insist, the very foundation of the republic is in
peril.

You can criticize this view for just being silly or wrong, and many
have, but there’s another problem with it: it’s completely ahistorical.
As Robert McChesney describes in *The Problem of the Media*, objectivity
is a fairly recent invention — the republic was actually founded on
partisan squabblers.

When our country was founded, newspapers were not neutral, non-partisan
outlets, but the products of particular political parties. The Whigs had
their paper, the Tories theirs, and both of which attacked their
political opponents with slurs that would make even the most
foul-mouthed bloggers blush. This behavior wasn’t just permitted — it
was encouraged.

You often hear the media quote Jefferson’s comment that “were it left to
me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, or
newspapers without government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer
the latter.” However, they hesitate to print the following sentence:
“But I should mean that every man should receive those papers, and be
capable of reading them.” In particular, Jefferson was referring to the
post office subsidy the government provided to the partisan press.

In 1794, newspapers made up 70% of post office traffic and the big
debate in Congress was not over whether the government should pay for
their delivery, but how much of it to pay for. James Madison attacked
the idea that newspaper publishers should have to pay even a token fee
to get the government to deliver their publications, calling it “an
insidious forerunner of something worse.” By 1832, newspaper traffic had
risen to make up 90% of all mail.

Indeed, objectivity wasn’t even invented until the 1900s. Before that,
McChesney comments, “such notions for the press would have been
nonsensical, even unthinkable.” Everyone assumed that the best system of
news was one where everyone could say their piece at very little cost.
(The analogy to blogging isn’t much of a stretch, now is it? See, James
Madison loved blogs!)

But as wealth began to concentrate in the Gilded Age and the commercial
presses began to lobby government for more favorable policies, the size
and power of the smaller presses began to dwindle. The commercial
presses were eager to be the only game in town, but they realized that
if they were, their blatant partisanship would have to go. (Nobody would
stand for a one-newspaper town if the one paper was blatantly biased.)
So they decided to insist that journalism was a profession like any
other, that reporting was an apolitical job, based solely on objective
standards.

They set up schools of journalism to train reporters in the new notion.
In 1900, there were no J-schools; by 1920, the major ones were going
strong. The “church and state” separation of advertising and reporting
became official doctrine and the American Society of Newspaper Editors
(ASNE) was set up to enforce it.

The entire foundation of press criticism was rebuilt. Now, instead of
criticizing papers for the bias of their owners, press critics had to
focus on the professional obligations of their writers. Bias wasn’t
about the slant of a paper’s focus, but about any slanting put in by a
reporter.

So that was the line of attack the house press critics took when the
world of weblogs brought back the vibrant political debates of our
country’s founding. “These guys are biased! Irresponsible! They get
their facts wrong! They’re unprofessional!” they squeal. Look, guys.
Tell that to James Madison.
