The Aftermath
=============

November 1, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/theaftermath)

* * * * *

On Halloween, everything seems a little weird. You see a spider web and
it’s not clear whether it’s real or a prop. You see a nun on the train
and think it might just be a costume. You see girls loitering on the
street only to find they’re just waiting for the *Rocky Horror Picture
Show*. So perhaps that’s why, when I logged into my bank account this
morning and saw more digits in my balance than I’ve ever seen before, I
didn’t feel anything in particular.

“Yeah, it’s there,” I said, to no one in particular. We called everyone
to make sure everything went through okay. Did I get it? Did you get it?
Did we get that? Everything checked out. “Looks like we’re all done
here,” went the email from the lawyers. After months of negotiations for
this day, it had finally come. I almost felt sad seeing the lawyers say
goodbye. Almost.

I sat reloading TechCrunch, then wrote a script to do it for me. Finally
the notice appeared, elaborating as time went on. Then I posted it to my
blog and others to theirs. It started seeming real. Finally, I dashed
downstairs to an ATM machine and asked it to print a slip with my
balance. “Would you like anything else?” it asked. “No,” I said, and
grabbed the slip. The numbers were big; the money was there. I started
grinning and dashed back to the apartment.

But that excitement soon faded. Post after post, congratulation after
congratulation, insult after insult. Friends emailed and called to share
goodwishes. Reporters called to talk to Alexis and Steve. (“No, that’s
A-L-E-X-I-S. Yes. Yes. Well, uh, it’s a news site.”) Users emailed to
send congratulations. “How do you feel?” everyone asked. I didn’t know.
How was I supposed to feel?

TechCrunch called to do a podcast, asked us to tell the listeners the
story of how we got to this day. And it wasn’t that anything said was
particularly wrong, strictly speaking, but I walked away thinking we’d
given the wrong impression. Companies getting bought makes you think of
lawyers in suits at conference tables signing papers. And while there
were lawyers and suits and conference tables and papers to sign (oh,
plenty of papers to sign), it wasn’t really like that. It was more just
a couple guys in a apartment typing on computers and talking on the
phone.

I remember how when reddit started, the whole thing seemed so childish.
The cartoony alien, the barebones design, the fresh-faced programmers,
the rented house. And none of that has really changed. It’s just that
with success behind it, it’s harder to dismiss. A scribbled drawing a
kid hands to you is “cute”, the same thing on the wall of a museum is
“art”. You assume there must be something there, even if you can’t see
it.

It’s hard to notice this when you’re in the middle of it. During the
days, I mostly saw my co-workers, who lived and breathed the site. At
night, I hung out with my friends, who all knew what I did. On weekends,
we’d go to parties for local startups, who all wanted to emulate
reddit’s success. Everyone we talked to treated us like it was serious.

But whenever I stepped outside the bubble, things were very different.
At non-tech parties, I’d have trouble explaining what it was I did. (“So
you, uh, have a web site?”) Once I went far outside the city to have
lunch with an author I respected. He asked about what I did, wanted me
to explain it in great detail. He asked how many visitors we had. I told
him and he sputtered. “I’ve spent fifteen years building an audience,
and you’re telling me in a year you have a million visitors?” I
assented.

Puzzled, he insisted I show him the site on his own computer, but he
found it was just a simple as I described. (Simpler, even.) “So it’s
just a list of links?” he said. “And you don’t even write them
yourselves?” I nodded. “But there’s nothing to it!” he insisted. “Why is
it so popular?”

Inside the bubble, nobody asks this inconvenient question. We just
mumble things like “democratic news” or “social bookmarking” and
everybody just assumes it all makes sense. But looking at this guy, I
realized I had no actual justification. It was just a list of links. And
we didn’t even write them ourselves.

But that’s not something you can say on TechCrunch. You can say a site
is cool, stupid, popular, a flop, innovative, or clichéd. But the one
thing you can’t say, the one thing that everybody skips over, is that
these sites aren’t anything serious. And so when Michael Arrington told
us that these stories of acquisition were his favorite part of the
“entrepreneurial spirit”, I couldn’t help but think that somebody was
missing the point.
