Who Runs Wikipedia?
===================

September 7, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: **Who Runs Wikipedia?**\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

**Translations:**
[日本語](http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Masao/WhoRunsWikipedia)
([add](mailto:me@aaronsw.com))

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

During Wikimania, I gave a short talk proposing some new features for
Wikipedia. The audience, which consisted mostly of programmers and other
high-level Wikipedians, immediately begun suggesting problems with the
idea. “Won’t bad thing X happen?” “How will you prevent Y?” “Do you
really think people are going to do Z?” For a while I tried to answer
them, explaining technical ways to fix the problem, but after a couple
rounds I finally said:

> Stop.
>
> If I had come here five years ago and told you I was going to make an
> entire encyclopedia by putting up a bunch of web pages that anyone
> could edit, you would have been able to raise a thousand objections:
> It will get filled with vandalism! The content will be unreliable! No
> one will do that work for free!
>
> And you would have been right to. These were completely reasonable
> expectations at the time. But here’s the funny thing: it worked
> anyway.

At the time, I was just happy this quieted them down. But later I
started thinking more about it. Why did Wikipedia work anyway?

It wasn’t because its programmers were so far-sighted that the software
solved all the problems. And it wasn’t because the people running it put
clear rules in place to prevent misbehavior. We know this because when
Wikipedia started it didn’t have any programmers (it used off-the-shelf
wiki software) and it didn’t have clear rules (one of the first major
rules was apparently [Ignore all
rules](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Ignore_all_rules)).

No, the reason Wikipedia works is because of the community, a group of
people that took the project as their own and threw themselves into
making it succeed.

* * * * *

People are constantly trying to vandalize Wikipedia, replacing articles
with random text. It doesn’t work; their edits are undone within
minutes, even seconds. But why? It’s not magic — it’s a bunch of
incredibly dedicated people who sit at their computers watching every
change that gets made. These days they call themselves the “recent
changes patrol” and have special software that makes it easy to undo bad
changes and block malicious users with a couple clicks.

Why does anyone do such a thing? It’s not particularly fascinating work,
they’re not being paid to do it, and nobody in charge asked them to
volunteer. They do it because they care about the site enough to feel
responsible. They get upset when someone tries to mess it up.

It’s hard to imagine anyone feeling this way about *Britannica*. There
are people who love that encyclopedia, but have any of them shown up at
their offices offering to help out? It’s hard even to imagine. Average
people just don’t feel responsible for *Britannica*; there are
professionals to do that.

* * * * *

Everybody knows Wikipedia as the site anyone can edit. The article about
tree frogs wasn’t written because someone in charge decided they needed
one and assigned it to someone; it was written because someone,
somewhere just went ahead and started writing it. And a chorus of others
decided to help out.

But what’s less well-known is that it’s also the site that anyone can
run. The vandals aren’t stopped because someone is in charge of stopping
them; it was simply something people started doing. And it’s not just
vandalism: a “welcoming committee” says hi to every new user, a “cleanup
taskforce” goes around doing factchecking. The site’s rules are made by
rough consensus. Even the servers are largely run this way — a group of
volunteer sysadmins hang out on IRC, keeping an eye on things. Until
quite recently, the Foundation that supposedly runs Wikipedia had no
actual employees.

This is so unusual, we don’t even have a word for it. It’s tempting to
say “democracy”, but that’s woefully inadequate. Wikipedia doesn’t hold
a vote and elect someone to be in charge of vandal-fighting. Indeed,
“Wikipedia” doesn’t do anything at all. Someone simply sees that there
are vandals to be fought and steps up to do the job.

* * * * *

This is so radically different that it’s tempting to see it as a
mistake: Sure, perhaps things have worked so far on this model, but when
the real problems hit, things are going to have to change: certain
people must have clear authority, important tasks must be carefully
assigned, everyone else must understand that they are simply volunteers.

But Wikipedia’s openness isn’t a mistake; it’s the source of its
success. A dedicated community solves problems that official leaders
wouldn’t even know were there. Meanwhile, their volunteerism largely
eliminates infighting about who gets to be what. Instead, tasks get done
by the people who genuinely want to do them, who just happen to be the
people who care enough to do them right.

Wikipedia’s biggest problems have come when it’s strayed from this path,
when it’s given some people official titles and specified tasks.
Whenever that happens, real work slows down and squabbling speeds up.
But it’s an easy mistake to make, so it gets made again and again.

* * * * *

Of course, that’s not the only reason this mistake is made, it’s just
the most polite. The more frightening problem is that people love to get
power and hate to give it up. Especially with a project as big and
important as Wikipedia, with the constant swarm of praise and attention,
it takes tremendous strength to turn down the opportunity to be its
official X, to say instead “it’s a community project, I’m just another
community member”.

Indeed, the opposite is far more common. People who have poured vast
amounts of time into the project begin to feel they should be getting
something in return. They insist that, with all their work, they
*deserve* an official job or a special title. After all, won’t clearly
assigning tasks be better for everyone?

And so, the trend is clear: more power, more people, more problems. It’s
not just a series of mistakes, it’s the tendency of the system.

* * * * *

It would be absurd for me to say that I’m immune to such pressures.
After all, I’m currently running for a seat on the Wikimedia Board. But
I also lie awake at night worrying that I might abuse my power.

A systemic tendency like this is not going to be solved by electing the
right person to the right place and then going to back to sleep while
they solve the problem. If the community wants to remain in charge, it’s
going to have to fight for it. I’m writing these essays to help people
understand that this is something worth fighting for. And if I’m elected
to the Board, I plan to keep on writing.

Just as Wikipedia’s success as an encyclopedia requires a world of
volunteers to write it, Wikipedia’s success as an organization requires
the community of volunteers to run it. On the one hand, this means
opening up the Board’s inner workings for the community to see and get
involved in. But it also means opening up the actions of the community
so the wider world can get involved. Whoever wins this next election, I
hope we all take on this task.
