Happy New Year
==============

January 2, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/happynewyear)

* * * * *

Nobody seems to have noticed, but over the past couple months, this blog
has been publishing a record post a day. Every weekday — plus, starting
a little later, a bonus post on sundays — I’ve written an entirely new
essay. I’ve done this while traveling, while celebrating holidays, while
galavanting around the world, while sleeping on the couches of published
authors. I’ve even written and posted whole pieces using the SSH feature
on my cell phone.

I don’t know anyone else who has done this. There are columnists who
write for the paper, but they only have to post a couple times a week.
And there are bloggers who post many times a day, but they mostly post
links and commentary, not whole essays. As far as I know, I’m alone in
this bizarre pursuit.

It was a fun experiment but it was also a lot of work. I still have lots
to say, but I’m not sure that forcing myself to say it every day is
quite so healthy. I want to work on writing better, not just faster. I
wrote most of the blog posts in about an hour and while they’re decent
for something written at that rate, they can rarely be called great.

So I think it’s time to slow down, work more on crafting my prose, maybe
write for magazines and other outlets. (If someone out there wants to
publish me, [drop me a line](mailto:me@aaronsw.com)!) This will probably
hurt my readership, but running this blog has always been a weird and
random occupation, done more for me than for page views.

So I guess that’s goodbye for now and thanks for stopping by. If this
piece gets posted when it’s supposed to, it’s New Year’s Day and I’ve
still got a couple more weeks of winter break to spend world-travelling.
So expect some silence until I get back. *Au revoir!*
