Serious Social Science
======================

July 21, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/socialscience)

* * * * *

I once attended a psychology lecture in which the speaker argued that
Freud was really a brilliant psychologist, but the field had passed him
by because of its “physics envy”. His specific example is perhaps easy
to mock, but it has resonance because the problem is a real one. [As
Paul Graham shows](http://www.paulgraham.com/resay.html), in general
physicists are smarter than social scientists. But (to use a Grahamism),
like kids trying to act adult, the social scientists end up emulating
the form of these fields but not the content. In other words, instead of
getting smarter, they play make-believe.

The first thing that comes is the numbers. Real science papers are
filled with tables and graphs and regressions on piles of data, so the
social scientists decide to do all that. In economics, they even go so
far as to start coming up with equations and proving theorems. Then
comes the technical language. Physics papers discuss the “gravitational
wave perturbations about a brane cosmology embedded in a
five-dimensional anti-de Sitter bulk” so the cult studs decide they
should be just as incomprehensible.

And then, in the headiness of this newfound power of *science*, grand
claims are made. As J. K. Galbraith writes (\_Annals of an Abiding
Liberal, p. 4): “It is the great desire of nearly all economists to see
their subject as a science too. Accordingly, and without much thought,
they hold that its matter is also fixed. The business firm, the market,
the behavior of the consumer, like the oxygen molecule or the
geologist’s granite, are given.”

This is not to say that there is anything intrinsically wrong with using
math or jargon or making grand claims. But to adopt these habits
reflexively is to put the means before the ends. Scientists do not use
math because it is complicated but because, for what they are doing, it
is effective. Their grand pronouncements become accepted because
(sometimes, at least) they are true.

Such complaints, among a certain sector, are truisms. But the conclusion
typically drawn with them is pure pessimism. Social behavior, they
argue, is simply too complex for us to ever make real progress in the
field. The topic is studied by idiots and charlatans because the
intelligent and honest can immediately see its impossibility. I do not
agree with such a view. In fact, I think it is only possible to maintain
it thru abject ignorance of what science really knows.

The vulgar postmodern critique of science argued that scientists had
become our modern priesthood: deified as “experts” they would make
claims about how the world worked, claims with just as much authority as
those made by religion in earlier times. And while such comparisons were
wrong, they did betray a truth: society has, for largely selfish
reasons, inflated the accomplishments of science beyond their actual
existence. (See R. C. Lewontin’s fabulous *Biology as Ideology* for
evidence of this theme, from a respected scientist.)

Scientists — even the hardest of scientists — fabricate data, fabricate
studies, fall prey to fads, and otherwise get things wrong. But more
relevantly, they just don’t know that much. We have very little idea of
how the body works; the pills we take are made through the bluntest of
means. We don’t know how to calculate very simple things, like the
dispersion of milk in a cup of coffee. The illusion that social science
is ineffective can only be sustained by ignorance of such
ineffectiveness of hard science. The upside of all this is that there is
hope for social science.

So what is to be done? For reasons beyond the scope of this article, its
unlikely that the existing disciplines can be reformed. Instead what is
needed is a culture of serious social science built outside the existing
systems of academia. Its work should be primarily outwardly-facing,
because that’s the important audience. This means clear writing (unlike
this article, perhaps) for public consumption. And it means compilations
of broad scope, instead of obscure monographs.

We can already see the beginnings of such a thing in the work by people
like Doug Henwood and Christian Parenti. But there is certainly much
more to do, including building structures to do the work in.

So that’s the other thing I’m thinking about.
