The Secret Behind The Secret
============================

March 26, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thesecretsecret)

* * * * *

The \#1 bestselling book in America is a 216-page volume called *The
Secret*, based on a DVD of the same title. “Truly life-changing
information,” exclaims the publisher on Amazon.com. “A new era for
humankind,” exults the web site. “This is The Secret to everything — the
secret to unlimited joy, health, money, relationships, love, youth:
everything you have ever wanted. […] [It] utterly transformed the lives
of every person who ever knew it… Plato, Newton, Carnegie, Beethoven,
Shakespeare, Einstein.”

What is this incredible secret? Namely, that the universe is governed by
a heretofore unknown Law of Attraction, as yet undiscovered by
conventional physicists, that the world rearranges itself to conform to
your thoughts. Or, as one proponent put it, the universe “is akin to a
big mail-order department,” in which you “‘order’ what you get by
sending energetic messages out to the universe.”

This stuff is so blatantly absurd that it’s not really worth debunking.
And it’s silly enough that [Barbara Ehrenreich has already written the
definitive
mockery](http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B00E5DF113CF937A2575BC0A9639C8B63&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all)
(“Thoughts exert a gravitational-type force on the world, so that
‘whenever you think something, the thought immediately attracts its
physical equivalent.’ If you think money — in a totally urgent, focused
and positive way, of course — it will come flying into your pockets.”).
[Twice](http://ehrenreich.blogs.com/barbaras_blog/2007/02/the_secret_of_m.html)
(“I don’t have to write this blog, I can simply visualize it already
written — or could, if I’d bothered to read the whole book and finish
the DVD.”)

But, drawing on some of Ehrenreich’s other work, I’d like to discuss
they *why* of this book. The book’s success is easy enough to explain.
As [the Canadian publisher put
it](http://www.thestar.com/article/193263) in an interview with the
*Toronto Star*, “Basically, human beings are lazy. If you tell them you
can get rich just by thinking about it, obviously, they’re going to buy
it.”

But these books also have a more insidious effect. As Ehrenreich notes,
by making your lack of wealth and a good job into personal problems, you
discourage people from looking at the social systems that created and
sustained those problems. By telling them their thoughts control the
universe, you can persuade them to do things like — as one
Secret-endorsing book encouraged — “Place your hand on your heart and
say … ‘I admire rich people!’ ‘I bless rich people!’ ‘I love rich
people!’ ‘And I’m going to be one of those rich people too!’”

And, in reverse, by telling people that bad things are caused by their
negative thoughts, you get to persuade them to stop thinking about bad
things. “I’m a really big believer in The Secret,” a young black woman
recently explained at a Secret-related book reading. “But I also believe
that discrimination and racism are real. How can you harmonize those
things?”

“You just said you believe in discrimination,” explained the guru. “You
be-*live* it. I’m going to ask you to stop believing it, because if you
focus on the negative, you project it yourself.”

That’s right — if you stop believing in the existence of discrimination,
it’ll stop happening to you. No need to fight to end it! Those black
people banned from lunch counters in the South? They weren’t simply
believing hard enough. Those studies showing that resumes with
black-sounding names on them received far fewer callbacks as identical
ones with white-sounding names? The researchers didn’t take into account
their thoughtwaves.

Following this idea goes to some pretty dark places and the authors take
it all the way. “I really love what you’re doing,” said a young man at
the same event. “But how, for example, was 9/11 attracted to the people
in those buildings? That’s something I can’t understand.”

“Sometimes, we experience the law of attraction collectively,” explains
the guru. “The US maybe had a fear of being attacked. Those 3,000 people
— they might have put out some kind of fear that attracted this to
happen, fear of dying young, fear that something might happen that day.
But sometimes, it is collective.”

When you manage to convince people that even getting murdered is their
own fault, you’ve truly found the secret of success. For the already
powerful, that is.
