Area Scientist’s Study Confirms Own Prejudices
==============================================

October 22, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/areascientist)

* * * * *

CAMBRIDGE, MA—In a study published today in the prestigious journal
*Nature*, Harvard professor Dr. Thomas Jacobson, an expert in the field
of physical neuroscience, finds that the gangly cortex, the area of the
brain associated with stumbling, fumbling, and general klutziness, is
smaller in members of the Red Sox sports team than in other major league
baseball players.

The study, entitled “Differential Size Analysis of the Gangly Cortex In
Professional Sports”, was conducted using a technique called Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or fMRI, in which brain activity is observed
on a computer monitor while subjects perform a mental activity. In his
fMRI studies, Dr. Jacobson noted significantly less mental activity in
the gangy cortex of Red Sox players when he asked them to visualize
various aspects of a baseball game.

“Obviously far more research needs to be done,” explained Dr. Jacobson,
“but this evidence does appear to support the popular belief that Red
Sox players are just better than everyone else.”

The study could have major implications for the entire field of physical
neuroscience, which examines how differences in the brain can affect
performance in various types of strenuous physical activity, including
baseball, American football, running the mile, hockey, and the biathlon.

“I haven’t seen the study but I think it’s extremely brave work,” said
former Harvard President Lawrence Summers when asked to comment.
“There’s an academic orthodoxy of political correctness that says you
shouldn’t inquire too much into the differences between sports teams.
Well, Dr. Jacobson has thrown that out the window and science is better
off for it.”

The study appears in the July 27th issue of *Nature*, along with new
research showing that [eating chocolate is good for your
heart](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/in_depth/sci_tech/2001/glasgow_2001/1521982.stm),
[Jews are just smarter than everyone
else](http://www.seedmagazine.com/news/2005/12/jews_on_jews_jews_are_great.php),
[semen makes women
happier](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/2067223.stm), and [all women
are
bisexual](http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2003/06/030613075252.htm).
A new study showing that having sex with scientists [is associated
with](http://cr.yp.to/postpropter.html) a 20-point increase [in
IQ](http://bactra.org/weblog/523.html) is expected to be released soon.
