Science or Philosophy?: Jon Elster and John Searle
==================================================

May 12, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sciphil)

* * * * *

As the name suggests, the social sciences have often seen themselves as
an analogue or extension of the natural sciences and have from the
beginning aspired to their successes. Like many who want to duplicate
success they do not understand, social sciences has been obsessed with
duplicating the *form* of the natural sciences and not its motivations.
Just as rival music player manufacturers have tried to copy the look of
the iPod without understanding why it takes that look, the social
sciences have copied the structure of the natural sciences without
understanding why they take that structure.

The greatest success of the natural sciences is undoubtedly the laws of
physics. Here, an handful of simple equations can accurately predict the
motion of a vast variety of everyday objects under common actions.
Seeing this, social scientists have aspired to derive similar laws that
predict the behavior of whole societies. (Others, meanwhile insist the
entire project is impossible because the society will respond to the
creation of the law, making the law invalid — reflexivity.)

But reflection upon the history of the natural sciences will see that
this notion is insane. Physics did not develop thru attempts to discover
the laws that explained all of motion. Instead, various kinds of motion
(like falling objects) were described, rules for their behavior deduced,
and commonalities in those rules discovered. Eventually it was the case
that the commonalities were so great and the rules so few that a handful
of laws could explain most of the phenomena, but this assumption was not
made *a priori*.

Jon Elster argues that the social sciences should proceed in a similar
way: various social phenomena should be described, the mechanisms that
give rise to them explained, and the commonalities among mechanisms
discovered. Most of his work consists of practicing social science in
this way, with a few attempts at laying out a toolbox of these common
mechanisms.

Modern social science is so split between attempts at grand law-like
theories and modest essays of careful description that Elster’s third
way seems alien and hard to comprehend. But there is a clear model that
social scientists can look to: analytical philosophy.

Analytical philosophers do not take as their task grand law-like
explanations for the world. Instead, they set upon a particular piece of
conception — language, free will, ethics — and try to discover its
logical structure. In doing so they often develop tools they shared in
common with other philosophical projects.

This similarity can perhaps be best seen in the work of the man who is
Jon Elster’s closest equivalent in the world of analytical philosophy,
John Searle. In his career, Searle has addressed a number of topics:
language, intentionality, consciousness, social reality, and
rationality. Throughout he has taken has his task providing a clear
description of the phenomena and explaining the pieces it consists of.
And in explaining those pieces, he frequently develops tools that he
reuses in his other explanations.

Take the notion of *direction of fit*. Searle argues that all statements
have a direction of fit, which can be either up, down, both, or null. If
we imagine (by convention) that statements float above the world
pointing down at the things they represent, then statements like “John
and Jill are married”, in which it is the job of the statement to change
to accurately represent the world, have a downward direction of fit. By
contrast, statements like “I want to marry him”, in which it is the
world must change to match the statement, have an upward direction of
fit.

This notion, which Searle and Austin developed for describing language,
Searle later reused for describing mental states. Love, for example, has
an upward direction of fit, belief downward, and joy null. And in my own
everyday life, I have found the same tool useful in thinking about
various phenomena I’ve encountered.

Social scientists don’t seem to read much philosophy. I suspect most of
them see it as an alien culture consisting of, [as Paul Graham put
it](http://www.paulgraham.com/raq.html), “either highly technical stuff
that doesn’t matter much, or vague concatenations of abstractions their
own authors didn’t fully understand.” But perhaps they should, because
even if the technical stuff lacks interest (and considering some of the
topics involved, I’m skeptical that this is always the case), the tools,
and the way they’re wielded, should be a lesson.
