Real Good Books
===============

July 4, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/realgoodbooks)

* * * * *

So I was sitting there, reading Natalie Angier’s *[The
Canon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0618242953)* and complaining to my
roommate. “God, this book is so overwritten,” I whined. “This is the
worst science book since Lauren Slater published *Opening Skinner’s
Box*.” I read her a random sentence: “Am I sounding a self-pitying,
sour-grapes-turned-defensive whine? Of course: a good offense begins
with a nasal defensiveness.” I was about to read more when she stopped
me. “If that book is so bad,” she asked, “why do you keep reading it?”

And so, we decided on a plan: for the month of June, I would only read
good books. Unfortunately, this plan didn’t go as well as I had hoped —
good books are harder to find that it might seem at first. I realized
what I really wanted was books that were compulsively readable, the kind
that once you slurped down like wet noodles, where once you started in
on them you just couldn’t stop.

I’ve read a couple books like that, but not many. For example, [David
Boies’ autobiography](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375726551) isn’t the
kind of thing I would normally pick up. Self-aggrandizing
autobiographies aren’t exactly my thing and Boies, while interesting,
isn’t exactly a topic of fascination for me. But when I found myself
holding it with a couple minutes to kill, I started reading it and
before I noticed it I was most of the way through the 500 page book.

Or take James Wolcott’s *[Attack
Poodles](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140135212X)*. Now I love a good
media-bashing as much as the next guy, but this one I just couldn’t put
down. I had to sneak away from dinner to finish reading it. And when it
was done, I found myself wanting more.

What both books have in common, aside from being fun reads, is a small
red rectangle on in the upper left of their covers. The rectangle is
part of the “Miramax Books” logo which stretches from the back cover
around the spine to the front of every book they publish. As far as I
know, Miramax is the only publisher audacious enough to put their logo
on the cover of their books, and while I initially took it as a sign of
Hollywood arrogance, I now see it as something else: a mark of quality.
Perhaps, I figured, Miramax works so hard to make their books readable
that they want to capitalize on that brand by making it really clear
which ones were theirs. I even dreamed of having my books published by
Miramax.

So when my plan for June fizzled out, I tried to think of how I could
fix things for July. And I hit upon the idea of spending it only reading
Miramax books. Unfortunately for me, when the Weinstein Brothers (who
ran Miramax) left Disney, Miramax Books got the axe. The Weinstein
Brothers have restarted their book division at their new company
(cleverly named The Weinstein Company, apparently because Fellowship
Adventure Group was [“too
gay”](http://gawker.com/topic/the-weinsteins-fellowship-adventure-group-015542.php))
but their first real book doesn’t come out until September.

So here’s a plea to you readers: where does one find compulsively
readable books? Who do *you* trust?
