Against Reflective Equilibrium (or, What is ethics for?)
========================================================

December 30, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/ethicsfor)

* * * * *

Imagine you were an early settler of what is now the United States. It
seems likely you would have killed native Americans. After all, your
parents killed them, your siblings killed them, your friends killed
them, the leaders of the community killed them, the President killed
them. Chances are, you would have killed them too, and you probably
wouldn’t have seen anything wrong with this.

Indeed, it probably wouldn’t even have occurred to you to think about
the morality of this. If you did, it would probably seem just. They were
trying to kill *you*! And your family! Going after them was just
self-defense! (It wasn’t, of course; you invaded *their* land.)

Or if you see nothing wrong with killing native Americans, take the
example of slavery. Again, everyone had slaves and probably didn’t think
too much about the morality of it. That was just the way the world was.
If you were asked about the big moral questions you faced, you’d
probably think of things like the proper time to pay back a loan, or
lying to your wife, or maybe a child’s duty of obedience to their
father.

Today, looking back on people who murder native American and keep
slaves, those seem like comparatively small potatoes. Sure, we justify
it by saying that they were just people of their time, but still… It’s
hard to get over the fact that George Washington ordered his general to
“lay waste all the settlements around…that the country may not be merely
overrun, but destroyed.” (He also ordered that they not “listen to any
overture of peace before the total ruin of their settlements is
effected. Our future security will be in…the terror with which the
severity of the chastisement they receive will inspire them.”) It
somehow colors everything he says. Whatever he may have thought about
loan repayment or lying, slavery was the big moral question of his time,
and (in practice, at least) he got it wrong.

We don’t kill native Americans much these days and we don’t keep slaves,
but it’s hard to believe that our era must be morally perfect. Surely if
people back then could make such huge moral blunders, we could be making
similar ones right now. And ethical philosophy is useless if it can’t
help us avoid such huge mistakes.

Some people suggest that the way to do ethical philosophy is to listen
to our intuitions. “I do not think our intuitions about cases are less
reliable than those about principles,” Frances Kamm argues.

But *of course* our intuitions about cases are less reliable! If we
could simply trust our intuitions, we wouldn’t need ethical philosophy
at all. If something was wrong, we would just know it was wrong. There
would be nothing philosophy could tell us.

Obviously this is absurd. Lots of people do things that seem clearly
unethical while thinking they’re in the right. Perhaps Kamm thinks these
mistakes are merely the result of temporary passions and that from her
desk at Harvard she can consider such question with a more objective
eye.

But, as I have shown, people’s intuitions about cases are
*systematically* distorted. Sitting at a desk wasn’t enough to persuade
George Washington to stop killing native Americans. His mistake wasn’t
the result of some momentary passion, but of an entire culture that had
normalized mass murder and a society that depended on it. To think that
he would just suddenly sit down and go “Hmm, murdering Indians feels
wrong to me” is ridiculous. The only way he would possibly conclude that
is by taking seriously his *principles*.

I grew up eating animals. I saw nothing wrong with this. My parents ate
them, my siblings ate them, my friends ate them, people on TV ate them,
the President ate them. I doubt I stopped to think about the morality of
eating animals any more than I stopped to think about the morality of
brushing my teeth. If you asked me for my intuition, I would have said
eating animals was just fine. It was only when I stopped eating animals
that my intuitions began to change.
