Tips for Better Thinking
========================

December 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbetter)

* * * * *

Go to the library and you’ll find whole bookcases full of books on how
to write better. But look for a book on how to *think* better and you’ll
be busy for a while. (The only major book I could find — *Crimes Against
Logic* — was a dreadful little series of basic logical fallacies dressed
up in political polemic.)

It can’t be that writing is more important than thinking. While I’ve met
many people who can’t exactly write, it seems that just about everyone
has to think — even writers. Nor do I think it’s that the task is really
harder. We know very little about the internal process of writing, so
writing guides consist mostly of good and bad examples, along with some
general rules. Surely one could do the same for thought.

Perhaps the answer is that there isn’t such a thing as good thinking.
But the case for it seems even stronger than the case for good writing.
Good thinking is that which better helps us approximate reality —
avoiding fallacies, missteps of judgment, faulty assumptions,
misunderstandings, and needless fillips and loops.

And yet the subject’s plain importance, I can find scarcely an article
that takes up the topic. Where is the piece that savages bad thinking
the way [Mark Twain savaged Fenimore Cooper’s aimless
writing](http://www.pbs.org/marktwain/learnmore/writings_fenimore.html)
or the way [Orwell went after political abuses of
English](http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/politics/english/e_polit)
or, for more modern readers, [Matt Taibbi’s dissection of Thomas
Friedman’s latest
book](http://www.alternet.org/columnists/story/21856/)? It seems like it
would be just as fun — if not more — to watch a gifted writer slice and
dice up a convoluted thought until it becomes apparent that it’s
actually meaningless.

The closest I can think of is [Chomsky’s review of B.F.
Skinner](http://www.chomsky.info/articles/19711230.htm) (an unfair
match-up if there ever was one — a bit like using a blow torch to clear
off a dust mite). But Chomsky’s attacking Skinner’s ideas rather
specifically (and, more generally, exposing the political implications
behind bogus science); the essay is certainly not one in a series of
examples of how to think better.

As one gets more skilled, the opportunities for improvement become less
available — apparently because fewer people are interested in improving.
The library gives free courses in how to read better, but these are for
people who have trouble reading long books, not for those who already
can but want to continue to improve. And there are courses in improving
your writing, but they generally only get you from awful to serviceable,
and not from serviceable to great. The same seems true of thinking —
there are many books on fairly blatant logical fallacies to avoid, but
few on more subtle improvements to thought.

And yet, at least with writing, people try. There are English courses in
schools, [taught by some of the greatest writers of the
generation](http://english.syr.edu/cwp/saunders.htm). And journalists
can semi-apprentice themselves by freelancing before great editors, who
slice and dice their prose until it shines. Yet I’ve never seen a class
or an apprenticeship in thinking, except perhaps incidentally.

The reason, I think, is because no one is [thinking
bigger](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thinkbigger). But that means
there’s plenty of opportunity. The field’s wide open, folks.
