The Goog Life: how Google keeps employees by treating them like kids
====================================================================

December 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googlife)

* * * * *

I was talking with a friend the other day about that perennial subject
of conversation in the Valley, Google. And finally she gave me the clue
that made the whole place make sense. “It’s about infantilizing people,”
she explained. “Give them free food, do their laundry, let them sit on
bouncy brightly-colored balls. Do everything so that they never have to
grow up and learn how to live life on their own.”

And when you look at it that way, everything Google does makes a sick
sort of sense.

Not a whole lot has changed since the last time I visited Google. The
campus is bigger — the buildings across the street, instead of being
reserved for lawyers and other lowlifes, are now being used by the
engineering staff as well, to keep up with Google’s nonstop growth. And
the employees seem a little less excited about things than the last time
I was there. Nobody says “We’re on a mission to change the world!”
anymore. Now they say, “Yeah, I’m just going to stick around here
another six months until my options vest.” and “I kind of want to
transfer out of my group but I worry that all the other groups are
worse.”

But the two blatant changes to the campus are a large, terribly
fake-looking replica of SpaceShipOne hanging in the middle of the main
building and a replica dinosaur skeleton standing outside. “It’s as if
this place is being decorated by seven-year-olds,” a friend comments. It
also reminds me of Robert Reich’s comment about Newt Gingrich: “His
office is adorned with figurines of dinosaurs, as you might find in the
bedrooms of little boys who dream of one day being huge and powerful.”

The dinosaurs and spaceships certainly fit in with the infantilizing
theme, as does the hot tub-sized ball pit that Googlers can jump into
and throw ball fights. Everyone I know who works there either acts
childish (the army of programmers), enthusiastically adolescent (their
managers and overseers), or else is deeply cynical (the hot-shot
programmers). But as much as they may want to leave Google, the
infantilizing tactics have worked: they’re afraid they wouldn’t be able
to survive anywhere else.

Google hires programmers straight out of college and tempts them with
all the benefits of college life. Indeed, as the hiring brochures
stress, the place was explicitly modeled upon college. At one point, I
wondered why Google didn’t just go all the way and build their own
dormitories. After all, weren’t the late-night dorm-room conversations
with others who were smart like you one of the best parts of college
life? But as the gleam wears off the Google, I can see why it’s no place
anyone would want to hang around for that long. Even the suburban desert
of Mountain View is better.

Google’s famed secrecy doesn’t really do a very good job of keeping
information from competitors. Those who are truly curious can pick up
enough leaks and read enough articles to figure out how mostly
everything works. But what it does do is create an aura of impossibility
around the place. People read the airbrushed versions of Google
technologies in talks and academic papers and think that Google has some
amazingly large computer lab with amazingly powerful technology. But
hang around a Googler long enough and you’ll hear them complain about
the unreliability of GFS and how they don’t really have enough computers
to keep up with the load.

“It’s always frightening when you see how the sausage actually gets
made,” explains a product manager. And that’s exactly what the secrecy
is supposed to prevent. The rest of the world sees Google as this
impenetrable edifice with all the mysteries of the world inside (“I hear
once you’ve worked there for 256 days they teach you the secret
levitation,” [explains xkcd](http://xkcd.com/c192.html)) while the
select few inside the walls know the truth — there is no there there —
and are bound together by this burden.

Such a strategy may have worked in the early days, when Googlers were a
select and special few, but as the company grows larger and employee’s
identification with it grows thinner, Google has to step up their
efforts to acculturate. And that’s where the life-size dinosaur replicas
come in. Enjoy being huge and powerful while you can. Because, like the
dinosaurs, this too will pass.
