How to Promote Startups
=======================

June 9, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/prostartup)

* * * * *

When people talk about how government can promote startups, there seems
to be a fairly standard consensus: we need more economic inequality.
[Lower income](http://www.paulgraham.com/inequality.html) and [capital
gains](http://www.paulgraham.com/america.html) taxes provide more
incentive to work, looser labor laws make it easier to fire
non-performers, and large private wealth funds provide investment
capital.

But having been through a startup myself, I think there’s much more you
can do in the other direction: decreasing economic inequality. People
love starting companies. You get to be your own boss, work on something
you love, do something new and exciting, and get lots of attention. As
Daniel Brook points out in *The Trap*, 28% of Americans have considered
starting their own business. And yet only 7% actually do.

What holds them back? The lack of a social safety net. A friend of mine,
a brilliant young technologist who’s been featured everywhere from PBS
to Salon, stayed in academia and the corporate world while all of her
friends were starting companies and getting rich. Why? Because she
couldn’t afford to lose her health insurance. Between skyrocketing
prices and preexisting condition exclusions, it’s almost impossible for
anyone who isn’t in perfect health to quit their job. (I only managed
because I was on a government plan.)

Anyone with children is also straight out. Startup founders tend to be
quite young, in no small part because no one can afford to support a
family on a startup founder’s salary. But if we had universal child
care, that would be much less of an issue. Parents would be free to
pursue their dreams, knowing that their children were taken care of. And
universal higher education could let parents spend their savings on
getting a business started, instead of their children’s tuition. Plus,
it’d give many more kids the training and confidence they needed to
start a company.

And those large private wealth funds that result from growing
inequality? A real problem for startup founders is that they’re *too
large*. It used to be that you could borrow a couple thousand dollars
from friends and neighbors to get your business off the ground.
Nowadays, they’re too busy trying to make ends meet to be able to afford
anything like that. Meanwhile, those large wealth funds I mentioned are
now so big they can only afford to invest in multi-million dollar chunks
— much more than the average founder needs, or can even justify. And the
large investments come with large amounts of scrutiny, further narrowing
the recipient pool.

But imagine if the government provided a basic minimum income, like
Richard Nixon once proposed. Instead of having to save up (increasingly
difficult in a world in which the only way to survive is on credit card
debt) or borrow money to stay afloat, you could live off the
government-provided income as you got things started. Suddenly having to
quit your job would no longer be such a huge leap — there’d be a real
social safety net to catch you. (Not to mention if those labor laws some
people want to loosen required your old job to take you back if things
didn’t work out.)

Of course, there is some truth to the standard proposals. Some startup
founders are encouraged by dreams of financial security, and high taxes
can make that dream more elusive. And complex labor regulations can make
it difficult to get new companies off the ground. But it’s not an issue
of whether we should have taxes or labor laws — it’s an issue of how
they’re targeted.

Estate taxes on inherited fortunes would have basically no impact on
startup founders, but could go a long way to funding a social safety
net. And since most startups are acquired as stock, income taxes are
basically irrelevant — it’s really capital gains tax that gets applied.
There’s no reason the government couldn’t apply a lower capital gains
tax to startups that get acquired than they do to the shares of
publicly-traded companies that large investors trade.

The same is true for labor laws: preventing large companies from firing
people at random can provide some much-needed stability to their lives,
especially if they’re saving up money in the hopes of going into
business themselves. But there’s no reason such laws also have to be
applied to small startups, where the company is more likely to go out of
business than to fire you.

Look at social democratic Europe, where these policy prescriptions have
been tried. While there’s much less of a culture of entrepreneurship and
only 15% of Europeans think about starting their own company, nearly all
(14.7%) of them actually go ahead and do it.

The fact is, if governments really want to promote startups and the
economic innovation they bring, they shouldn’t listen to the standard
refrain of cut taxes and deregulate. They need to start rebuilding the
social safety net, so that their citizens know that if they go out on a
limb and try something risky, someone will be there to catch them if
things don’t work out.

*Thanks to Daniel Brook’s book* [The Trap: Selling Out to Stay Afloat in
Winner-Take-All America](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0805088016) *for
suggesting this line of argument and providing the statistics.*
