Our Underachieving College Presidents
=====================================

February 9, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/underbok)

* * * * *

[![Book cover](image1_underbok)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691125961)

It would seem absurd to claim that nobody cares about the quality of
higher education. After all, anyone paying attention can name a dozen
bestselling polemics off the top of their head — *The Closing of the
American Mind*, *The University in Ruins*, *Tenured Radicals*, *Higher
Superstitions*. But as Derek Bok points out in his quietly subversive
new book, *Our Underachieving Colleges*, these commentators have treated
universities largely as a punching bag for their political and
professional views, rather than out of any genuine concern for the
education of the students.

A classic example are the heated debates about what should be in the
core curriculum. Should the humanities be required? Should things be
focused around the great books? What about classes in writing and public
speaking? Professors will happily argue about the proper allocation of
required classes for hours, but you’ll never once hear them comment
about the *way* in which these classes are taught. And without decent
technique, it doesn’t matter what the topic of the class is.

Bok shows deep familiarity with a largely-hidden literature about the
effectiveness of college teaching. Nearly 80 percent of all college
courses are simply lectures by professors, a stunningly ineffective form
of teaching. By the end of a lecture, a student remembers less than half
of what was taught. Only a week later, that number is down to 20%. At
such stunning rates, it’s hard to imagine much is left after a month,
let alone by the time the student gets out of college.

And yet nobody seems to care one whit. Bok is hardly to be excepted from
this criticism. After the Larry Summers scandal, he was appointed acting
president of Harvard University (and before that he was president from
1971 to 1991). Bok expects to only have the job for a year and no doubt
his hands are tied in many ways — but rumor about campus is that he
wants to make his year count. Yet Bok’s biggest changes have been a
recommendation for more hands-on activities and the elimination of early
admissions. Not bad moves, by any means, but hardly anything like the
deep rethinking Bok’s book suggests is necessary.

But if Bok — a thoughtful and intelligent figure who has written
eloquently about these problems — can’t use his position — the most
prominent spot in the entire field, with the deadline already on his
head freeing him from any accountability — can’t do anything about these
problems, what hope do we possibly have? Opportunities like this come
around once a century and it appears that Bok is going to blow it.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691125961)


[image1_underbok]: image1_underbok.jpg