Journalistic Capture and Fixing CNBC
====================================

March 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fixcnbc)

* * * * *

*Attention conservation notice:* Just [Fix CNBC!](http://fixcnbc.com/a)
and add your name.

Sometimes the government will set up a new regulatory agency, like a
Mine Safety and Health Administration or something to keep watch on the
mining industry. And off they go, investigating the mining industry to
make sure they’re being safe.

Only something funny happens. It turns out all the people they talk to
all day are mining industry officials. And whenever they hold meetings
to ask for advice, the only people who show up are mining industry
officials. When they make proposals and ask for public comment, all the
comments are from mining industry officials. And pretty soon, they start
thinking like mining industry officials.

Academics call this regulatory capture — an office was put in place to
regulate an industry, but it ended up just being a tool of the industry.

But what’s striking is that the problem isn’t just limited to
regulation; the same thing happens to journalists as well. Call it
journalistic capture. And there are few examples of it more obvious than
that of CNBC.

CNBC, a channel supposed to cover economic news, basically acts as a
full-time cheerleader for the financial industry. When the market was
booming, this wasn’t so noticeable. Whole swaths of the country started
daytrading and checking the CNBC ticker regularly to feed their buy-sell
trigger fingers.

But now that the market’s gone belly-up, it all seems a whole lot less
appealing. Which is what Jon Stewart has been getting at with his
critiques of the network.

Well, it’s less satisfying to complain when you can actually do
something about it, so some friends and I have started a new campaign:
**Fix CNBC!** [As HuffPo
reported](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/03/16/economists-progresses-pet_n_175249.html),
we’re demanding CNBC commit to holding Wall Street accountable, starting
with hiring someone who was *right* about the economic crisis.

We’d really love for you to sign our open letter:

-   [Fix CNBC!](http://fixcnbc.com/a)

