The Meaning of Borat
====================

November 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/borat)

* * * * *

*For this week’s Sunday Bonus Post, I’m reprinting a note I sent to some
email lists.*

I went to see the film *Borat* last night. To be honest, I didn’t really
enjoy it as entertainment as much as I thought I would. Nevertheless, I
thought I wanted to correct a common misconception.

A lot of people seem to think the movie is just making fun of
stereotypes. Borat is a sterotypical foreigner, his “victims” are
stereotypical Americans, and the humor comes from laughing at them.
There are perhaps a couple short scenes where this might be true, but
it’s a pretty small part of the film.

In reality, *Borat* is about the existence and enforcement of cultural
norms. In place after place, Borat goes somewhere and does exactly what
you’re not supposed to do. By doing so, he demonstrates exactly what our
cultural assumptions are, makes us laugh uncomfortably at their
violation while we start to question their legitimacy, and then
documents the punishment inflicted for violating them.

There are scenes where he questions feminist dogma, provides a brilliant
critique of nationalist rhetoric, violates norms about racial
integration, takes superstar-worship culture to its logical conclusion,
and, in my favorite scene, deconstructs the fake niceties of the
television interview (something I’ve always dreamed of doing).

This is an incredibly tough kind of humor to do, because watching people
violate cultural norms is so challenging. We’re ingrained from birth
with an injunction to follow the rules of behavior in such situations
and violating them does not come naturally. (A Japanese friend said that
watching the film was actually painful in parts.)

Even though, as I said, I personally didn’t enjoy the film as much as I
hoped, I still think that it’s an important project. Challenging
cultural assumptions is incredibly tough. If you just criticize them
outright, people think you’re weird and dismiss you. And if you violate
them yourselves, you suffer the social punishments. But it’s a very
worthwhile cause; I’m glad to see someone receive so much success for
trying.
