How to Get a Job Like Mine
==========================

April 7, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/pcccjob)

* * * * *

[[Беларуская](http://pc.de/pages/pcccjob-be)]

Apparently a lot of people have gotten the mistaken impression from my
blog that I sit around and think about abstract philosophy all day.
Well, I guess I do kind of do that, but my day job is actually much more
exciting. I’m a cofounder of [the Progressive Change Campaign
Committee](http://boldprogressives.org/) (BoldProgressives.org) and I
spend my days experimenting with new ways to get progressive policies
enacted and progressive politicians elected.

Like a lot of people, I grew up feeling frustrated with the world —
extremes of wealth and poverty, insane and bloody wars, outdated
intellectual monopoly laws, big corporations run amok. But I had no idea
what to do about it. Writing just felt like preaching to the choir,
marching in the streets felt like the protest of the powerless, working
with people on the ground just didn’t seem to scale.

But when my friend Larry Lessig decided to run for Congress, I begun to
see that there was something I could do. During the short-lived
campaign, we were besieged with offers of help from consultants,
software companies, and services firms. Their technology was invariably
outdated and incompetent (the leading tools are built on SQL Server),
uncoordinated and poorly-designed. The advice they gave was horrendous,
their incompetence bordered on sabotage, and the prices they charged
would bankrupt us.

We started the Progressive Change Campaign Committee in January 2009
with the notion that we could fix all that. We would help filter the
good consultants from the bad, write up best practices and conduct
experiments to learn what works. Along the way, we got pulled into issue
campaigns as well — at first [going after CNBC for their terrible
coverage of the economic crisis](http://fixcnbc.com/), then spending
most of the last year [getting Congress to pass a public option in the
health care bill](http://whipcongress.com/). Along the way, we’ve gotten
over 400,000 members and raised over a million dollars for our various
tactics. Not bad for our first year!

But now, as the 2010 campaigns ramp up, we’re getting back to our
original mission. We’ve been working with campaigns to help them find
talented staff, competent consultants, and money-saving techniques. But
we also need some talented programmers to build the next generation of
campaign tools. We’ve got some really exciting ideas, but we need your
help.

So here’s the ask: **Want to work with me on building some amazing tools
for some amazing campaigns?** If so, just send me an email at
[aaron@boldprogressives.org](mailto:aaron@boldprogressives.org) or [just
fill out this
form](http://act.boldprogressives.org/cms/sign/app_senprogrammer/).

Then, tell your friends. Your country needs you.
