Getting It Right
================

October 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingitright)

* * * * *

There’s an interesting little experiment you can do. If you have a
classroom of kids and you give them a bunch of tasks they can work on of
varying difficulty, the kids will pick the tasks that are just outside
their level, that stretch them to do a little bit more. (This is, of
course, if they aren’t getting graded on this. If they’re getting
graded, they’ll always pick the easy ones.)

When I first heard about this experiment, I just assumed it was because
they were good kids. But now I think there’s a different explanation.
It’s because doing this is fun.

Working on something that’s too easy for you isn’t enjoyable, it’s just
mindless. (There’s a reason few people play [50K
Racewalker](http://www.hrwiki.org/index.php/50K_Racewalker).) But doing
something that’s too hard for you isn’t fun either. It’s just like
trying to run through a wall: you’re not going to succeed and you’re not
going to learn much from it. So, like Goldilocks, the kids pick the task
that’s just right.

But it’s not simply by default either. There’s something actively
enjoyable in itself about learning to achieve more. (I’ve [come to call
this](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/easywayout) the “Kipper effect”,
after the novel Kipper’s Game which revolves around this idea.) There’s
a definite high to achievement, the rush of accomplishment, just as
there’s a corresponding low when you fail.

I’m looking for more research on this idea — and I’d be very grateful if
anyone could point me to it. What kinds of things trigger the Kipper
effect? Does it wear off? etc.
