What Does Google Mean by “Evil”?
================================

August 22, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil)

* * * * *

Pretty much ever since Paul Buchheit suggested “Don’t be evil” as a
corporate values statement (and Amit Patel begun writing it on
whiteboards around the office), any time Google does something people
don’t like, they begin calling it “evil” and complaining that Google is
violating its prime directive.

But surely “evil” means something more than just “wrong” or “bad”. If
the girl across the street peers through your window to watch you
undress, we might say that was bad and wrong and awful, but I don’t
think anyone would try to claim it was evil. Evil is a really strong
term!

Now part of the joke is that Google seems to be using it rather loosely.
If you look at [their
examples](http://www.google.com/about/corporate/company/tenthings.html)
of evil deeds, they seem rather mundane compared to cackling
supervillains and mass murderers. They specifically name three: showing
irrelevant ads, using pop-ups or other annoying gimmicks, and selling
off actual search results.

Hardly the stuff of comic books. But what do these three have in common?
**They’re all instances of refusing to make things worse for your users
in order to make more money.** Perhaps that still seems like a mundane
conception of evil, but I think it gets at something important. Evil
isn’t just about doing terrible things — it’s about doing terrible
things for bad reasons. The evil villain cackles and brags about how
they’re on the side of evil — they explicitly oppose doing good. And
this definition of evil is all about that: if you’re working against
your own users, you must have crossed the line and joined the other
side.

When you stop to think about it, it’s wild how many companies have done
just that: Printer manufacturers who put chips on their ink cartridges,
so you can’t refill or recycle them but instead have to buy a new
full-price cartridge. Apple preventing the Kindle app from having any
sort of ebook buying functionality. Web publishers who break articles up
into 20 pages so that you have to load 20 different ads just to read one
article. These are pretty banal evils, but it’s striking that I can’t
think of any example where Google has done anything like that. (Perhaps
someone will name one I’ve missed in the comments.)

There are lots of things I disagree with Google about — the most recent
being their refusal to [let my friends with chosen
names](http://my.nameis.me/) use Google+ — but those things aren’t evil
by this definition. For example, Google
[defends](http://www.jwz.org/blog/2011/08/nym-wars/) their real names
policy by saying it’ll lead to better conversations. They still claim to
be fighting for the user.

So if you want to argue with Google, that’s the way to do it: don’t say
that they’re hurting someone out there in the world or violating some
rule or principle, say that what they’re doing isn’t serving their
users. Because that’s the line Google’s afraid to cross.

*Thanks to Kragen Sitaker for
[discussions](http://lists.canonical.org/pipermail/kragen-discuss/2011-August/001176.html)
that inspired this post.*

**UPDATE:** [Chris Soghoian
observes](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c8) Google refuses to
add Do-Not-Track support to its browsers or servers in order to maximize
ad profits. [Scott Teresi
suggests](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c10) Google’s refusal
to provide customer support (in order to save money) qualifies. [Tom
Slee reminds me](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c19) of their
infamous net neutrality deal with Verizon. [John Gruber
argues](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2011/08/23/swartz-google-evil)
that having ads at all is evil in this sense. [Mark Heath points
to](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/googevil#c33) those infuriating
YouTube ads.
