How Depressions Work
====================

February 4, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/depressions)

* * * * *

On Capitol Hill sit many powerful people — Congressmen, Senators,
Justices — but also numerous others who do the daily work of keeping
government running. And, like anyone with such a weighty responsibility,
they sometimes want a break: a chance to see a movie or eat out with
their spouse.

Kids always make these things difficult, so in the late 1950s someone
thought of starting a Capitol Hill Babysitting Coop. The idea was
simple: a bunch of families would get together and dole out scrip —
little fake money — amongst themselves. Anytime you wanted to go out,
you could just hire another family in the coop to watch your kids: one
piece of scrip per hour. Later, of course, you’d earn the money back by
watching someone else’s kids.

It was a brilliant system and much beloved, until sometime in the 1970s.
See, when people left the babysitting coop, they got to keep the balance
of their scrip. And so, over the years, the amount of scrip in
circulation fell. Soon scrip was in short supply and people begun
hoarding theirs for fear of losing it forever. There were few
opportunities to babysit (and thus earn scrip) so people didn’t want to
lose the scrip they had by paying it to a sitter. Which, of course,
meant even fewer babysitting opportunities, making more people want to
hoard their scrip, and on and on in a downward spiral.

Since the coop consisted largely of lawmakers and lawyers, they
attempted a legislative solution to the crisis, requiring everyone go
out at least once every six months. The proposal just made things worse.
Eventually, someone tried the idea of handing out more scrip to
everyone, and soon, the coop’s delicate balance was restored.

* * * * *

![Book cover: Why the Real Estate Boom Will Not
Bust](image1_depressions)

In the 2000s, house prices started rising and everyone started sinking
their money into them. Average people would buy houses and mortgage
them, banks would buy mortgages, investors would buy mortgage
derivatives from banks, and so on. Pundits published books with titles
like *Why the Real Estate Boom Will Not Bust* and many people just
assumed housing prices would go up forever. At the peak of it, we had
roughly \$80 trillion in global financial assets.

Of course, it was clear to anyone who looked closely that this couldn’t
go on forever — and that when it stopped, it would bring a lot down with
it. And, sure enough, today housing prices are almost back to their
usual level and we now have only \$60 trillion.

Just like people taking scrip out of the babysitting coop, an enormous
amount of money has been taken out of the economy. So naturally people
want to hold on to what’s left. So they don’t spend their money, which
means there’s less employment opportunities, which means more people
want to hold on to their money, and on and on in a downward spiral.

Normally when this happens, as in a recession, the government has an
easy solution: lower interest rates. What happens is the country’s
leading bankers meet at the Federal Reserve and vote to lower interest
rates. Let’s say they decide to lower them (as they’ve done a lot
lately). Then the Federal Reserve Bank in New York starts buying up
Treasury Bills (government IOUs) for cash, injecting money into the
economy. This allows banks to lend out more money, lowering the interest
rate at which money is lent out, and thus encouraging people to start
spending again. (Later, when the economy is doing well, they’ll raise
the rates again, pulling money out and making sure things don’t get out
of hand.)

But this isn’t simply a recession. The Fed’s lowered the interest rate
to zero — *zero!* they’re giving money away — and unemployment just
keeps rising. Losing a quarter of global financial assets hurts. But now
the Fed has a problem: it can’t lower the interest rate anymore.
Interest rates don’t go any lower than zero.

Which means, as J. M. Keynes foresaw back during the first Great
Depression, we need another way of getting money into the economy. This
isn’t rocket science — Keynes suggested stuffing bills into bottles and
burying them down mineshafts; Milton Friedman once proposed tossing cash
out of helicopters. But as long as the government is spending money, we
might as well spend it on something useful. And thus, fiscal stimulus.

We spend the money to build roads and trains and high-speed Internet
connections. We give away health care and hand out welfare checks and
mail people tax rebates. We do whatever it takes to get more money into
the economy. Which people then turn around and spend on all the things
they normally start spending money on and the engine of capitalism once
again start to turn.

* * * * *

Keynes’ genius came in seeing that the Depression wasn’t a moral
problem. We’re not being punished for our exuberance or our stinginess,
just as the folks on Capitol Hill weren’t at fault for not wanting to go
out. In both cases, the problem wasn’t legislative, but merely
technical: there just wasn’t enough money to go around. And the
technical problem has a technical solution: print more money.

The moralists insist it’s irresponsible for us to just print more money.
After all, they say, debt got us into this mess; is more debt really
going to get us out? This is what they told FDR, causing him to hit the
break on a recovery that was pulling us out of the Great Depression.
This is what they told Japan, ending their recovery and plunging the
country into a “lost decade” of unemployment.

It’s not irresponsible to spend money; it’s irresponsible not to.
Factories are lying idle, people are sitting at home unemployed, and our
economy is slowing. We can spend money to make use of it all, or we can
just continue downward spiral. The choice is ours.

* * * * *

Further reading:

-   Sweeney and Sweeney, “[Monetary Theory and the Great Capitol Hill
    Baby Sitting Co-op
    Crisis](http://cda.morris.umn.edu/~kildegac/Courses/M&B/Sweeney%20&%20Sweeney.pdf)”
    [PDF]
-   DeLong, “[The Financial Crisis of 2007-2009: Understanding Its
    Causes, Consequences—and Its Possible
    Cures](http://www.scribd.com/doc/9719227/null)” [scribd]
-   Krugman, *[The Return of Depression
    Economics](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0393071014)*
-   Baker, [Why Stimulus Won’t Increase the
    Debt](http://www.prospect.org/csnc/blogs/beat_the_press_archive?month=11&year=2008&base_name=mankiw_promulgates_confusion_o#111235)


[image1_depressions]: image1_depressions.jpg