The Immorality of Freakonomics
==============================

June 17, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/immoralfreaks)

* * * * *

As the hype around the book *Freakonomics* reaches absurd proportions
(now an “international bestseller”, the authors have been signed for a
monthly column in the *New York Times Magazine*), I think it’s time to
discuss some of the downsides that I mostly left out of my main review.
The most important of which is that economist Stephen Levitt simply does
not appear to care — or even notice — if his work involves doing evil
things.

The 1960s, as is well-known, had a major civilizing effect on all areas
of American life. Less well-known, however, was the immediate pushback
from the powerful centers of society. The process involved a great
number of things, notably the network of right-wing think tanks I’ve
written about elsewhere, but in the field of education it led to a
crackdown on “those institutions which have played the major role in the
indoctrination of the young”, as a contemporary report (*The Crisis of
Democracy*) put it.

The indoctrination centers (notably schools) weren’t doing their job
properly and so a back-to-basics approach with more rote memorization of
meaningless facts and less critical thinking and intellectual
development was needed. This was mainly done under the guise of
“accountability”, for both students and teachers. Standardized tests,
you see, would see how well students had memorized certain pointless
facts and students would not be allowed to deviate from their assigned
numbers. Teachers too would have their jobs depend on the test scores
their students got. Teachers who decided to buck the system and actually
have their students learn something worthwhile would get demoted or even
fired.

Not surprisingly, as always happens when you make people’s lives depend
on an artificial test, teachers begun cheating. And it is here that
Professor Levitt enters the story. He excitedly signed up with the
Chicago Public School system to try to build a system that would catch
cheating teachers. Levitt and his co-author write excitedly about this
system and the clever patterns it discovers in the data, but mostly
ignore the question of whether helping to get these teachers fired is a
good idea. Apparently even rogue economists jump when the government
asks them to.

Levitt has a few arguments — teachers were setting students up to fail
in the higher grade they would be advanced to — but these are tacked on
as afterthoughts. Levitt never stops to ask whether contributing to the
indoctrination of the young or getting teachers fired might not be an
acceptable area of work, despite being an economist, he never weighs any
benefits or even considers the costs.

Levitt, by all appearances, was not, like some of his colleagues, a
self-conscious participant in this regressive game. He was just a rube
who got taken in. But surely preventing others from the same fate would
be a more valuable contribution.
