What Happens in *Batman Begins*
===============================

August 22, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/batmanbegins)

* * * * *

*Warning: Naturally, spoilers follow — for both* Batman Begins *and* The
Dark Knight Rises.^[1](#fn:fn1)^

We begin in the 1980s, when the global forces of evil have decided to
institute a new economic policy on the world. Their nefarious plan
dramatically exacerbates inequality, making the rich filthy rich while
the poor suffer terrible levels of unemployment.

The difference is that in the Batman universe, Gotham’s leading
billionaire (Thomas Wayne) can’t stand the suffering and begins
investing in the city when the government won’t. He builds a giant
Keynesian supertrain in a desperate attempt to get the city back to
work. But, in an ironic twist, he ends up murdered by one of the
desperate poverty-stricken citizens he’s trying so hard to help.

The murder of the billionaire shocks the surviving billionaires, leading
them to reverse their neoliberal policies. Instead of getting tough on
crime, they decide to indulge criminals, with a deep willingness to
treat criminality as merely a mental health problem.

As the billionaires retreat from power, organized crime steps in, taking
their place in buying off judges and unions and cops. Instead of being
run by Wayne Enterprises, the city ends up being run by mob boss Carmine
Falcone.

But a few rogue elements in the police and DA’s office refuse to be
bought off. They free the man who murdered Thomas Wayne in exchange for
his testimony against Falcone. Bruce Wayne, the billionaire’s son, is so
haunted by his personal demons that he can’t stand this trade-off. When
his childhood-friend-turned-rogue-ADA points out the selfishness of his
position, he confronts Falcone. When Falcone explains that Bruce will
always live in fear of what he does not understand, Bruce sets off on a
quest to understand criminals.

His search concludes in a far eastern terrorist training camp, which
turns out to be backed by the same global forces of evil that invented
neoliberalism. It’s the year 2000 and they have a new plan: attacking
Gotham with the hope of inspiring enough fear that the city will destroy
itself.^[2](#fn:rg)^

Bruce, still haunted by the execution of his parents, refuses to become
an executioner himself and, instead of joining the plot, sets fire to
the camp before returning to clean up Gotham his own way. He begins by
putting together a case against Falcone and re-seizing control of Wayne
Enterprises by buying up its shares on the public market.

In doing so, he begins a reversal of history that eventually culminates
in [*The Dark Knight Rises*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr). His
attack on Falcone leads to a new era of tough-on-crime, which dethrones
the organized criminals and allows the wealthy to seize power again. The
wealthy quickly reinstitute neoliberalism and buy back Bruce’s shares on
the public market, putting Wayne Enterprises back in their hands. But
the global forces of evil step in once again to “restore balance” by
letting Bane to release the organized criminals.^[3](#fn:gfe)^ Bruce
Wayne goes back to being an innocent child of privilege and the trilogy
ends exactly where it started.^[4](#fn:rob)^

* * * * *

1.  *Batman Begins* is very clearly the mirror image of [*The Dark
    Knight Rises*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/tdkr) (some scenes are
    almost word-for-word the same), so understanding one can help us
    understand the other. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Yes, in this trilogy 9/11 really was an inside job, from the same
    folks who brought you Reaganomics. [↩](#fnref:rg)

3.  Democrats, Republicans, organized crime, or billionaire financiers —
    whoever tries to seize power, the global forces of evil continue to
    hold the reins from behind-the-scenes, making sure nobody changes
    the system too much. [↩](#fnref:gfe)

4.  Exactly, right down to how Robin (who see as a small boy in the
    first film, the same way we see Bruce in flashbacks) ends the film
    frustrated by the system (the same way Bruce was frustrated by
    Rachel) and is about to head out in a quest of his own, following
    the same path Bruce Wayne took. Thus the cycle
    continues. [↩](#fnref:rob)


