On Losing Weight
================

July 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/losingweight)

* * * * *

Exactly three months ago, [I wrote about the Shangri-La
Diet](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet). While I started on it
basically immediately, it wasn’t until exactly two months ago that I got
a scale to measure my weight with (so some data has been lost). Since I
got the scale, however, I’ve lost over twenty pounds.

Shockingly, losing weight has to be one of the easiest things I’ve ever
done. I simply don’t eat unless I’m really hungry and then I eat as
little as possible (a couple crackers, for example). Most days I just
have a couple crackers in the evening. It saves time and money and
hassle (and makes it easy to eat healthy) and while I do get some weird
looks from friends at restaurants, always being a fussy eater that’s
nothing new. (Furthermore, [there’s some
evidence](http://www.blog.sethroberts.net/2006/06/22/meal-skipping-good-or-bad/)
that not eating significantly prolongs lifespan.)

The one thing that really did surprise me is that [while I predicted
there would be strong social pressures to lose
weight](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fatfuture), in reality all the
pressure seemed to go the other way. Friends and acquaintances urge me
to eat more, doctors think I’m sick, family members suggest I have an
eating disorder. Part of this is probably just due to novelty: While
“eat less” is standard advice for losing weight, because we all have set
points no one is actually able to pull it off. Thus when someone
actually does losing weight by eating less, it’s usually because they
really are sick or something like that. But in my darker moments, I
wonder if part of it is selfish. The extraordinarily thin people
encouraging me to eat more, I darkly wonder, don’t want me to be like
them. The people who need to lose some weight don’t like the example of
my success. I don’t like thinking this way, and I have no evidence for
it, but it’s hard to resist.

There’s not much more to say; food is even less a part of my life than
it was before. I still plan to lose more weight and will provide further
updates accordingly. Still, since many people seem to be interested in
the topic (and in keeping with the theme of my blog), a diary of my
three months follows.

* * * * *

The first thing I noticed was the burping. When losing weight, it seems
you burp quite a bit. But even worse is the feeling of *wanting* to
burp. The olive oil, it seems, has inflated my stomach with gas, making
me desperately want to burp, but I can’t. In fact, it was so painful
that I decided to stop taking the olive oil. I still ate less — it seems
like once the olive oil lowered my set point, it was easy to keep things
off from there. There were a couple days after eating lots where I would
feel hungry for long periods of time and had to ignore it, but if I did
that for a whole day, my set point went down, just like with the olive
oil.

I [went back home](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/suburbia) and saw some
old friends at my high school’s graduation. Many of them commented on
how thin I was. I was kind of surprised, because I didn’t think I was
noticeably thinner yet, but I have to say I enjoyed the compliment.
While on this vacation I told myself I’d forget the diet and would eat
all the good home foods I missed. But even doing this, I couldn’t gain
weight while on vacation. I was taken out to a nice restaurant downtown
but couldn’t finish my hamburger (which I typically had no problem
doing) — when I was half way through if I took another bite I felt like
I was going to throw up, so I just stopped. When I got back, I weighed
basically the same as when I’d left.

As I lost more weight I began to feel better. I’d look in the mirror and
notice the fat that had disappeared from my chest, or when lying down
I’d notice my legs were thinner. I felt like I had more energy. I felt
happier. I felt more mobile, more able to move around and do things now
that there was less of me. It felt wonderful.

One week I lost seven pounds in almost as many days and friends began to
look at me with concern. But I didn’t mind; I thought it was great. I
had started eating significantly less, hardly anything at all really.
When I moved into this new apartment (just as I was starting the diet),
I thought I would have a hard time finding novel places to eat each day.
But it hasn’t been hard at all; I’ve hardly gone out to eat by myself
*once* since I started the diet, except to treat myself to a food I
already knew I loved.

Writing about a gastric bypass (a surgery in which the stomach is shrunk
to help those who are extremely overweight lose weight) patient, surgeon
Atul Gawande describes a sensation I found extremely familiar:

> […] She [lost so much weight that] was unrecognizable to anyone who
> had known her before, and even to herself. “I went to bars to see if I
> could get picked up—and I did,” she said. “I always said no,” she
> quickly added, laughing. “But I did it anyway.”
>
> The changes weren’t just physical, though. She had slowly found
> herself to have a profound and unfamiliar sense of willpower over
> food. She no longer *had* to eat anything: “Whenever I eat, somewhere
> in the course of that time I end up asking myself, ‘Is this good for
> you? Are you going to put on weight if you eat too much of this?’ And
> I can just stop.” The feeling baffled her. She knew, intellectually,
> that the surgery was why she no longer ate as much as she used to. Yet
> she felt as if she were choosing not to do it.
>
> Studies report this to be a typical experience of successful gastric
> bypass patients. […]

(Atul Gawande, *Complications*, 174)

The newfound willpower allowed me to be more conscious about my diet. I
started thinking about what foods I wanted to eat and researching the
topic of nutrition. I read Walter Willett’s book about the results of
his epidemiological nutrition studies and begun looking at the labels of
boxes I ate. I begun ordering different things at restaurants when I did
eat and buying different things at the supermarket. But most of all I
found myself eating less.

When this proved not to be enough, I found myself exercising. I seemed
to be more out-of-shape now than it did when I started — I suspect with
all the weight loss I lost some other things too — but exercising was
probably easier to find the motivation for now. I fixed up my watch and
started timing myself, trying to make sure I lost the weight I wanted
to; this, of course, after I already lost twenty pounds and had stopped
eating almost entirely.

Losing weight had other effects too, some that saved further time.
Although I feel I have more energy overall, I still get tired. Sometimes
I just lie in bed thinking, when I feel little pops in my thighs as my
body breaks into the fat it has stored up over the years to find energy
to fuel me with. And at those moments I can only smile.
