The Sexual Life of Savages
==========================

October 16, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/savagesex)

* * * * *

In the early 1900s, anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski did his field
work in the Trobriand Islands of the Western Pacific. After getting
himself ashore, he dropped himself into their culture and begun having
to learn their language and understand their customs. The result were a
series of groundbreaking books in the field of anthropology, much of
which is still entertaining to read today.

In *The Sexual Life of Savages* (savages, Malinowski assures us, is a
technical term and not meant to cause offense) he describes the customs
of Trobriand’s intimate life, which is fascinating both for how it is
different and how it is the same.

To a certain degree, it seems like the culture of the islanders presages
our own. Back when Malinowski was doing his field work, he was amazed
that islanders could freely have premarital sex and yet still found it
desirable to get married. The same question would prove no puzzle to any
American today.

And, indeed, the islanders seem like a case study in the ultimate
consequences of the sexual revolution: girls want sex just as much as
guys, kids start having sex at a very young age — 6-8 for the girls and
10-12 for the guys — with no social stigma, there are few customs about
dating to inhibit “hooking up”, and, of course, revealing clothing has
been taken to its limit, with girls actually going topless.

Of course, much of the story of a Trobriand’s intimate life is the same:
initial attractions budding into lasting relationships, etc. And then,
out of nowhere, Malinowski drops in something totally bizarre. The
islanders don’t kiss, he explains. Instead, they scratch. The girls
scratch the guys so hard that they draw blood and, if the guys can
withstand the pain, then they move forward to having sex. The
ethnographer (as Malinowski calls himself) verified this by noting that
just about everyone on the island had noticeable scratches. And while
everybody is having sex whenever they want, premarital meal-sharing is a
big no-no. You’re not supposed to go out for dinner together until after
you get married.

But the most fascinating and strange part about the islanders are their
beliefs on the subject of pregnancy, also described in Malinowski’s
classic article “[Baloma: The Spirits of the Dead in the Trobriand
Islands](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/static/baloma.pdf)”. When people
die, you see, their spirit takes a canoe to the island of Tuma, which
works very much like the normal island except everybody is a spirit of
the dead. When the spirit gets old and wrinkled it shrugs off its skin
and turns back into an embryo, which a spirit then takes back to the
island and inserts into a woman. This, you see, is how women get
pregnant.

That’s right. The islanders do not believe that sex causes pregnancy.
They don’t believe in physiological fatherhood. Malinowski was
incredibly skeptical about this, so he tried all sorts of ways to see if
this was simply a story they told, while they actually the real deal.
But no, they assured him that it was really true, that all the white
people who insisted otherwise were being silly, that the spirits caused
pregnancy, not sex.

They argued the case quite logically. After all, they noted, one fellow
went on an expedition for a year or two and when he came back, he had a
new son. He obviously wasn’t having sex with her while he was away, so
where did the kid come from? (Cough.) And, they note, there are some
really hideous people on the island who nobody would dare have sex with,
yet they manage to become pregnant. (Malinowski spies some kids looking
sheepish when this subject is raised.)

They also argue the other way: people on the island are having sex all
the time from a very early age and yet they very rarely get pregnant.
(Naturally, the islanders don’t practice any form of contraception; the
very idea doesn’t make sense when sex doesn’t cause pregnancy.) The
white man’s argument just doesn’t make sense. Indeed, [recent visitors
report](http://www.travelintelligence.net/wsd/articles/art4print_520.html),
the islanders *still* believe that sex doesn’t cause pregnancy, despite
the best efforts of health workers.

It is speculated that the yams that form the basis of the island diet
have a contraceptive agent in them (The Pill was originally made by
looking at chemicals in wild yams), which conveniently explains quite a
bit, including the low birthrate despite the high level of sexual
activity. Indeed, the whole idea lends quite a bit of support to the
idea that material factors shape culture — after all, our own sexual
revolution didn’t happen until we got the yam’s chemicals in pill form
in 1960.

The notion has some other interesting consequences. For example, the
society is necessarily matrilineal, since fathers have no technical
lineage. Yet sociological fathers (the mother’s husband), Malinowski
notes, show more love and care for their children than most he’s seen in
Europe.

Furthermore, they believe the same rules apply to the rest of the animal
kingdom. This is what clinches it for Malinowski — despite all the
effort they go to to raise pigs, they insist that pigs also reproduce
asexually. They never attempt to breed pigs; indeed, they castrate all
the male pigs they have. (To them this is further proof — we castrated
all the pigs and yet they keep having children! Malinowski notes that
the domestic pigs often sneak off to canoodle with those in the wild.)

When I told a friend of mine about this odd state of affairs, he
wondered if the islanders were just stupid. After all, he noted, sex and
childbirth aren’t exactly two physically unconnected human activities.
But as he reflected on it further, he considered that this belief wasn’t
that much different from what passes for religion in our country. Smart
people believe strange things.
