The True Story of the Telephone
===============================

January 5, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/truetelephone)

* * * * *

*I grew up in Highland Park, Illinois, just down the street from where
the telephone was invented. I now live in Cambridge, Massachusetts, just
down the street from where it was stolen. Seth Shulman’s recent book*
[The Telephone Gambit](http://books.theinfo.org/go/039333368X) *lays out
the clearest case yet of how it all happened. Here’s the summary:*

Alexander Graham Bell (or Aleck Bell, as he was then called) was the son
of Alexander Melville Bell, the inventor of a system of phonic notation
called Visible Speech. The elder Bell would use Aleck as an assistant in
his demonstrations: After sending Aleck to wait in another room, Mr.
Bell would ask the audience for a word or strange noise then write it in
Visible Speech. Aleck would return and reproduce the sound from the
writing alone. Voila.

As a child growing up like this, he played at inventing machines that
could talk and telegraphs that could listen. But he found his career in
tutoring the deaf — by teaching them to pronounce the phonemes of
Visible Speech, he eventually succeeded in teaching them to talk and
read lips.

One of his students was Mabel Hubbard, daughter of prominent Boston
lawyer Gardiner Greene Hubbard. Son of a Massachusetts Supreme Court
Justice, Hubbard established water and gas and trolley utilities for
Cambridge, Mass. — some of the first in the nation. He also fervently
lobbied Congress to replace Western Union’s monopoly on the telegraph
with a new corporation, the US Postal Telegraph Company, that would
contract with the government Post Office.

At the time, telegraph wires blanketed the skies of Boston, hanging in a
dense web above the buildings. Many desperately wished for someone to
develop a telegraph that could send multiple messages over the same
wire, so that many wires could be replaced with just one. The theory was
that if one could transmit the messages using different tones, they
would “harmonize” instead of interfere, leading the idea to be called
the “harmonic telegraph”. Naturally, Alexander Graham Bell turned his
tinkering to this problem and persuaded Hubbard (as well as Thomas
Sanders, another father of a Bell student) to finance his research in
exchange for a share of any future US profits. Further complicating
matters, Bell had fallen in love with his student, Mabel Hubbard. Mr.
Hubbard made it clear he did not approve of such a marriage unless Bell
made a profitable discovery.

But Bell was simply a hobbyist, the real research was being done by a
man named Elisha Gray. Gray ran Western Electric, the leading supplier
of technical expertise to telegraph monopoly Western Union. From his lab
in Highland Park, Illinois, he and his assistants worked feverishly at
new discoveries. Bell was well aware of this and considered himself to
be in a race with Gray to invent the harmonic telegraph first.

In 1875, Bell made a breakthrough in his work on the harmonic telegraph.
But he was a crafty fellow — his deal with Gardiner and Sanders was only
about splitting *US* profits; it said nothing about profits overseas.
British law at the time granted patents only to inventions not patented
elsewhere first, so Bell drew up several copies of his harmonic
telegraph patent and sent some to be filed in Britain first. The rest
were sent to DC to be filed as soon as word got back from Britain.

On February 14, 1876, while the lawyers were waiting in DC to file
Bell’s patent, Gray filed a patent of his own. Bell’s lawyers were close
to the patent officers and had asked to be tipped off if Gray tried to
file something, so they could file Bell’s patent first. When Gray’s
patent was placed in the patent office’s inbox, Bell’s lawyers
hand-delivered Bell’s patent to the examiner, so they could claim he’d
received Bell’s first.

The patent examiner, Zenas Fisk Wilber, had fought in the civil war with
Bell’s attorney, Marcellus Bailey. Wilber was an alcoholic and owed
Bailey money (a serious Patent Office ethics violation). To pay his
friend back, he showed him Gray’s application. Bailey was startled to
find it wasn’t a patent on a harmonic telegraph at all — it was a patent
for a telephone, capable of transmitting all the sounds of human speech
and music. He called for Bell to come to DC at once.

Bell did, and examiner Wilber showed him Gray’s patent as well, taking
time to explain how it worked. Bell thanked him and returned that
afternoon with \$100 for his trouble. Bell then quickly scribbled an
addition to his patent in the margin, adding that it should also cover
“transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically” (this addition does
not appear in any of the other copies).

Contravening much standard practice at the time, Bell’s (modified)
patent was quickly granted, while Gray’s was denied. It was issued the
same day Bell returned home from DC, March 7, 1876. The following day,
Bell drew in his lab notebook a copy of the diagram he had seen in
Elisha Gray’s patent:

![Diagram showing the similarity between Gray's patent and Bell's
notebook](image1_truetelephone)

It took Bell several days of tinkering, but soon he was able to
replicate Gray’s device. On March 10, he made that now-famous call:
“Watson — come here — I want to see you.” Both Bell and his assistant
Watson recorded the event that night in their notebooks.

But Bell didn’t want to simply duplicate Gray’s work; he wanted to
invent a telephone of his own. He spent many months trying to develop a
telephone that worked on a different principle, but never succeeded in
getting it to clearly transmit audible speech. Bell was always
extraordinarily reluctant to demonstrate his telephone, for fear that
Gray would learn it was a simple copy. Mabel had to trick him into
attending the Centennial Exposition, where he was supposed to
demonstrate his work to a group of engineers, including Elisha Gray. On
one occasion, Bell’s telephone patent was set to be annulled unless Bell
would swear under oath that the invention was truly his. Bell fled the
country, testifying only at the last minute after desperate pleading
from Mabel.

The legal conniving a success, Bell and Mabel were soon married. Feeling
guilty, Bell gave all but ten of his shares in the Bell Telephone
Company to her and swore to never work in telephony again. The company
was operated by Gardiner and others while Bell went back to working with
the deaf. He always said he was more proud of his work for the deaf than
of the telephone.

It took Gray a long time to realize that Bell’s patent was a fraud. For
one thing, he was still focused on the harmonic telegraph; his customers
at Western Union couldn’t imagine running telephone wires to every house
and thus couldn’t see how talking over wires was particularly useful.
For another, it took years for the story to leak out, through numerous
court battles and Congressional hearings. [Zenas Fisk Wilber’s
affidavit](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c8/Zenas-fisk-wilber-affidavit.png)
confessing to what he’d done did not appear until 1886, a decade later.
Bell’s notebooks, making clear the blatant copy, were not made public
until the *1990s*.

Bell’s biographers have gone to heroic lengths to explain away all the
evidence. Refusing credit for the telephone just showed Bell’s humility;
not being involved in the corporation showed his dedication to pure
research. The fact that both patents were filed on the same day is a
grand historic coincidence — or perhaps *Gray* stole the idea from Bell.

As a result, Gray is forgotten and Bell is remembered as one of
history’s great inventors — not as he should be: a hobbyist and a fraud,
forced by love into stealing one of the greatest inventions of all time.

*Now playing: Regina Spector - “On The Radio”*

[image1_truetelephone]: image1_truetelephone.jpg