How Policy Gets Made: A Primer
==============================

May 17, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/policyprimer)

* * * * *

Barack Obama’s campaign was a model of efficiency and foresightedness.
Bill Clinton treated his campaign plans like marketing documents,
poll-testing each proposed new idea, and forcing his administration to
only begin seriously thinking about what to do once they were in office.
Obama, by contrast, started early and put together a series of policy
teams even before the campaign had begun in earnest.

Each policy team had a different subject — technology, health care,
foreign policy — and was led by a top ally or fundraiser in the field.
Let’s take technology, since it’s the case I’m most familiar with.
Julius Genachowski was named Chairman of the Technology, Media and
Telecommunications policy working group. Genachowski was a Harvard Law
School classmate of Obama’s who had gone on to become a chief executive
at Barry Diller’s IAC/InterActiveCorp (market cap: \$2.1 billion). He
went on to become a venture capitalist and sit on the board of numerous
technology companies.

He used his wealth ([annual
income](http://blogs.wsj.com/washwire/2009/04/01/fcc-nominee-to-take-a-big-paycut/):
\$1.6 million) and influence to become the leading Silicon Valley
fundraiser for his old classmate — indeed, one of Obama’s top
fundraisers nationally. As a result, he was the obvious pick to define
Obama’s technology policy. Genachowski canvassed his fellow Silicon
Valley business leaders for policy suggestions and his team synthesized
the results into proposed policy documents. These proposals were
circulated among a wider circle for further comments before being
published on the campaign website.

After the election was won, the teams were reassembled as transition
teams. Genachowski was again leading the technology team, now named the
Technology, Innovation & Government Reform Policy Working Group (TIGR).
It was staffed by old government hands, like Thomas Kalil (Deputy
Assistant to President Clinton for Technology and Economic Policy, rode
out the Bush years as Special Assistant to the Chancellor for Science
and Technology at UC Berkeley). Also brought out were business leaders,
like Andrew McLaughlin (Head of Global Public Policy and Government
Affairs for Google), and business-affiliated academic experts, like
Susan Crawford (UMich law professor and a former partner at a DC law
firm).

The teams worked on converting the policy documents from the campaign
into instructions that would be given to federal agencies or executive
orders the President could sign. They fleshed out campaign proposals,
interviewed potential candidates for government positions, and held
audiences with various interest groups. I visited DC during this period
and got to see the aforementioned names at DC cocktail parties or the
diner outside transition headquarters that became the informal
meeting-place of the team. “It’s the hardest I’ve ever worked in my
life,” Susan Crawford told me, clearly relishing the challenge.

After the inauguration, the teams disbanded and their members either
returned to private life or were named to the administration.
Genachowski, who obviously had his pick of positions, was named chairman
of the Federal Communications Commission. Thomas Kalil became Associate
Director of Science and Technology Policy. Susan Crawford became Special
Assistant to the President for Science, Technology, and Innovation
Policy. McLaughlin went back to work at Google, where his connections to
the new administration are no doubt invaluable.

**UPDATE:** [McLaughlin was named Deptuy
CTO](http://www.informationweek.com/news/government/federal/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=217700899)
