Do Faces Cause Depression?: Self-Experimentation in Science
===========================================================

April 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/facedepress)

* * * * *

It all started, Seth Roberts says, when he wanted more practice doing
experiments. The closest thing at hand was himself. He was trying to
treat his acne and, although convinced that the pills were effective and
the cream was not, he decided to chart their effectiveness anyway for
practice. The results were the exact opposite of what he expected — the
cream helped and the pills did not. His acne went away and Roberts went
looking for bigger problems to solve.

* * * * *

It’s obvious that sleep follows some sort of circular rhythm, an inner
biological clock that makes us tired at the end of the day and refreshed
at the beginning. This is the clock that gets thrown off when we travel
and thus causes jet lag, for example. But what if other things mess with
the clock than simply when we go to sleep?

It wasn’t simply academic for Roberts, who frustrated from a serious
bout of “early awakening”, in which he’d wake up around 4am feeling
tired but unable to get back to sleep for another couple of hours.
Roberts searched for a way to cure his problem but none of the standard
methods seemed appropriate. So he decided to research the subject.

A 1979 study of people in caves suggested that contact with other people
affected when we fell asleep and a 1985 survey of daily activities in 12
countries led to another clue: Americans were much more often awake
around midnight than people in any other country and the only
distinguishing factor seemed to be late-night television. Perhaps,
Roberts thought, watching television could influence sleeping rhythm?

The most popular late-night television show at the time the study was
done was the *The Tonight Show*, with its person-heavy monologue. So one
morning Roberts decided to watch Jay Leno and David Letterman’s
monologues. It seemed to have no impact; an otherwise normal day. But
the *next* morning he woke up feeling great.

It was hard to believe that the television show could be responsible, so
Roberts decided to formalize the study. Every hour he’d write down three
numbers between 0 and 100 to measure how unhappy/happy,
irritable/serene, and reluctant/eager he was. And then he tried turning
the TV watching on and off again to see if it impacted his mood. It did
— he always felt better the next day. So he tried adjusting the show and
television set, finding that, despite his love for *The Simpsons*,
life-size human faces at about a meter away for 30 minutes worked best.

I have to concede, at this point, that the results sound fairly absurd
and unbelievable. But reading [Roberts’s papers on the
subject](http://sethroberts.net/self-experiment/), what’s striking is
how careful he is about the subject. An actual psychologist, publishing
in psychology journals, he’s taken into account every objection. The
results *cannot* be, as one would first expect, simply self-induced by
his own wishes. For one, Roberts took quantitative notes, so his memory
couldn’t be playing tricks on him. For another, the size of the
difference was too large to be explained through normal explanations. If
Roberts could simply *will* himself into waking up happy, why hadn’t he
done it before? Nor could such an explanation explain the numbers’s
careful sensitivity to how similar the TV watching was to human face
contact, especially since Roberts was originally hoping to be able to
watch his favorite shows, not face-heavy ones like *Charlie Rose*.

He also began noticing something he wasn’t expecting — his mood wasn’t
just raised the next morning, it was lowered that night. This graph
shows the pattern:

![Graph of mood over the course of 48 hours based on whether faces were
seen or not.](image1_facedepress)

Mood spikes up from 6am to noon, stays high during the day, and then
takes a dive around 6pm. (When not seeing faces, mood stays flat.)

And what about all those people who watched TV at night? Roberts found
that watching TV after 6pm also reduced mood, with the effect more
pronounced the later it was watched.

So what’s going on? If you look at faces in the morning, you feel worse
12 hours later but better 24 hours later. But the effect is muted if you
see faces in the evening. Roberts theorizes that your body is using the
faces to set its inner mood clock, which works similarly to its inner
tiredness clock. You want to be happy during the day (as opposed to the
night), but how do you tell when the day starts? The body assumes that
you gab with people when you wake up, so it uses seeing other faces as a
way to synchronize the clock. Of course, you want to make sure you’ve
got the timing right on the nighttime side as well, so if you see faces
late in the evening it tries to tweak the clock then as well.

This is consistent with what we know from other sources about
depression. Depression is highly correlated with insomnia as well as
social isolation and is often treated by disturbing sleep. The Amish,
who eat breakfast communally and go to bed very early, have 1/100th the
rate of depression as other Americans. And depression rates increased by
10 times in the 1900s, around the same time radio/TV, electric lighting,
and other such things became common.

I’m hoping to get a chance to test this myself, but it sure appears that
one easy way to improve mood is to look at faces in the morning.

* * * * *

Of course, even more than mood (which is generally considered difficult
to tweak) people want to improve their look. And Roberts has done
research on this as well, concluding that the body uses a similar
internal system to measure the ideal weight. The result is his
Shangri-La Diet which uses similar techniques to trick the body’s
internal system to cut down on appetite. His book on the subject, [*The
Shangri-La Diet*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640), comes out
this week. It’s been hailed as a diet book unlike any other. More on
that next time.

[image1_facedepress]: image1_facedepress.jpg