The Interrupt-Driven Life
=========================

August 20, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/interruptdriven)

* * * * *

After what seemed like years working in the Reddit isolation chamber, I
begun saying yes to all the interesting projects that came my way as
soon as I got out. And there were a lot of interesting projects.

I signed up to build [a comprehensive catalog of every
book](http://demo.openlibrary.org/about), write three books of my own
(since largely abandoned), consult on [a not-for-profit
project](http://bigideas.berkeley.edu/), help build [an encyclopedia of
jobs](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/avgpeople), get [a new
weblog](http://sciencethatmatters.com/) off the ground, [found a
startup](http://jottit.com/), mentor two ambitious Google Summer of Code
projects (stay tuned), build a Gmail clone, write a new online
bookreader, start a career in journalism, [appear in a
documentary](http://www.stealthisfilm.com/Part2/), and research and
co-author [a paper](http://www.aaronsw.com/2002/whowriteswikipedia/).
And that’s not including all the stuff I normally do. I’ve actually been
spending most of my time catching up on my 2000 email backlog, reading a
book a week, following a bunch of weblogs, and falling in love. (Falling
in love takes a shockingly huge amount of time!) Yes, it has been
pointed out to me that I’m insane.

Clearly part of this is that I have some kind of severe psychological
problem (an inability to say no, an inclination toward stress, and a
nasty habit of coping with stress by submerging myself in new projects).
But it’s not completely failing either. Every project has kind of
half-finished. Maybe this is worthless, maybe instead of half-finishing
thirteen projects I should just completely finish one. But it doesn’t
seem obviously stupid — a half-finished project has *some* value
(educational if nothing else) and it seems increasingly likely that some
of them will get finished properly.

So how is it that I’m able to do so many tasks that even I, upon
reflection, can’t see how they’re all getting done? The secret is to be
interrupt-driven. Previously, if I wanted to do something, I’d immerse
myself in that thing. I’d wake up in the morning thinking about the
problem, spend all day either working on it, reading background
materials for it, talking to friends about it, thinking about it in bed
before I went to sleep and then dreaming about it. I’m sure I did much
better work this way: all that thinking and dreaming led to lots of
ideas I wouldn’t have had otherwise. And it was fun, too. Immersing
yourself in a problem can be very enjoyable. (*See* Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi.) But clearly, you can really only work on one problem
at a time this way and it doesn’t leave much room for other people in
your life.

In the new system, for every task I have a partner. And they’re the one
responsible for thinking about it. Perhaps they don’t immerse themselves
in it totally like I sometimes did, but it takes up a substantial
portion of their mental energy. And so, after we hash out the big plan
together at the beginning, they work on it and think about it and worry
about it and when they get stuck or finish a piece or just want to talk
about it, they shoot me an email. Meanwhile, I sit at home and just deal
with these emails, answering questions and solving problems as they come
up.

Now while I think giving people a partner on these projects is really
valuable (I wish I had one on more of my immersive projects) I’ll
readily admit that I’m lousy at it. I’ve been spending too much time ill
and traveling and with people in my life to respond promptly or in
detail. (I’m sorry guys; I’m going to work hard to pare things down and
do better.)

But I think the larger principle is valuable. This is clearly how the
real big-shots “get things done”. Recall the scene in
[*Brazil*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001313) where the harried
executive strolls purposefully (yet aimlessly) through the corridors
with a trail of people waving papers behind him to which he barks either
yes or no. (Reprised in [last week’s
*Psych*](http://www.usanetwork.com/series/psych/theshow/episodeguide/episodes/s2_meatismurder/index.html).)
Of course, when things get that far, it’s rather unclear who’s actually
doing things. As with the political figure whose every minute is
scheduled by their campaign manager or their chief of staff, one begins
to wonder whether the others are working for the boss or whether the
boss is simply working for them. In this way, moving up the corporate
ladder means giving up more and more of your power and freedom.

At some point I plan to go back to the immersive life. I have some big
plans that are just important enough to need that kind of dedication.
But this is the year of Other People. I can’t be everything to everyone,
but I’ll try my best to “get things done”.
