Last Day of Summer Camp
=======================

January 22, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/summercamp)

* * * * *

Ten calls are coming through on my cell phone at once. I try to answer
them in order. Finally I get to my mom. “Just wanted to see how you
are,” she says. “Oh, by the way, Alexis called the cops.” I try to treat
this as nonchalantly as she is, but mean while I’m running to find my
pants. I don my gray hoodie, grab my keys, lock the door behind me, and
run out into the street, finally saying goodbye. I just make it — I see
the cops coming in front of my door as I make it to the next block.

I know exactly what to do in these kinds of situations; I’ve seen it in
all the movies. Turn off the wireless on the cell phone, pay for
everything in cash, don’t use RFID cards, stick to sidestreets. I stick
to sidestreets, but I still hear the cop sirens buzzing down all the
major roads. There are major roads on every side of me.

* * * * *

The lady across the aisle from me on the plane is pleading with the
flight attendant. She holds her small dog between her legs (“oh, don’t
worry,” she had explained, “he’ll stop barking once we take off”),
covered in only a blanket. The attendant is down on his knees, trying to
understand what she wants. He disappears and later I see the woman
pouring a small bottle of alcohol into her drink.

Apparently this was a mistake. The woman starts screaming profanity,
locking herself in the bathroom, running up and down the aisles.
Finally, she’s forcibly restrained. The pilot comes on loud over the
intercom, thanks us for our patience, explains that you’re not supposed
to mix alcohol with certain psychoactive medications, tells us law
enforcement will be meeting us at the gate.

Law enforcement meets us at the gate. “Please remain in your seats,”
comes the pilot’s voice. “Law enforcement has taken control of the air
craft. No one is permitted to move until law enforcement releases its
control of the air craft.” Law enforcement relinquishes the air craft
and as I exit I see the woman, with a couple policeman in front of her,
asking her if she can see the fingers they’re holding up.

“God,” I think. “Didn’t I just go through this yesterday?”

* * * * *

I forgot how much I hate San Francisco. The bus takes an hour to arrive,
while I have to stand in the human filth of the city. For some reason
they put the major bus transfer point at the same place drug dealers
congregate. It’s not a very fun place to wait.

I finally get home and tumble into the mat that makes up my bed.

Next thing I remember I’m in the Moscone Center. MacWorld is over, but a
few signs and people are still around. I look out a window for a bit and
a guy taps me on the shoulder. “I think they’re trying to punk Paul
Graham in that room,” he says, pointing. I go and see.

Paul Graham is indeed in that room, as is his girlfriend and my
co-founders and the other Y Combinators I know and a bunch of people I
don’t recognize (probably this year’s batch of Y Combinators). They
start surrounding me. I begin to suspect a trap.

“What’s going on here?” I ask Steve. “Wait a second, you brought me
here, didn’t you?” “What are you talking about?” Steve replies. “I mean,
I remember going to sleep, I remember kind of wanting to wake up, but
then all of the sudden I’m in the Moscone Center? How did I get here?
You must have brought me here, didn’t you?”

Steve denies all knowledge, but there’s a gleam in his eye.

The people surrounding me take a step closer.

“Alright,” I say. “I’ll make a deal. If I can tickle every last one of
you, I go free. Otherwise, you win.”

They seem to accept the deal.

I begin tickling.

People begin running, dodging, flying around the room. But I’m like a
heat-seeking missile. I track down every one of them, extend my hands
out, go straight for their armpits.

I win.

* * * * *

I wake up on my mat. The sun is shining brightly. It’s a beautiful day.
I whistle a happy tune. I go to wait for the bus. One bus goes by, it’s
too full to stop. Another comes by after what seems like an eternity.
It’s almost as full, but I’m not going to wait for yet another. I hang
from the bar overhead, just barely fitting inside. There’s no room for
my feet.

The bus gets off a couple blocks from my office. To get there, I have to
walk past the Moscone Center. That’s when it comes back to me. I look
hard at the Moscone Center. “Oh,” I say. “It must have been a dream.”

* * * * *

“Goooood Monday morning,” I say, entering my office. That’s kind of my
little thing, my little ritual. “Goooood XXX morning,” I say in a happy
voice, replacing the XXX with the name of the day I’m saying it on. I
only say it once each day.

My co-worker is ignoring me.

* * * * *

I am presented with a letter accepting my resignation. I am told to
collect my “personal effects”. A woman from HR politely escorts me from
the premises. She never says that she is escorting me, but she does
stand behind me wherever I go. I think I am supposed to leave.

I leave. The sun is shining brightly. It’s a beautiful day.
