Bubble City: Chapter 8
======================

November 18, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity8)

* * * * *

“Poly?” “Yeah, poly,” she said, hunting for her shirt and putting it
back on. No sense in being *that* forward when she answered the door.
“You mean like polygamous?” “No, silly, do I look like I have multiple
wives? I just have that one…” “You ha—wait, so what does poly mean?”
“Polyamorous,” she said, putting her socks back on. Jason saw her
heading to the door and realized he better put on some more clothes of
his own. Because putting on some more clothes of Sarah’s seemed wrong
for the mood. “Multiple loves.” Jason scurried towards his pants. “I
don’t instantly assume that just because I’m seeing one person that
means I can’t see another.” Jason tried to pull the pants up while
avoiding any unsightly bulges. “I just don’t sign on to that arbitrary
rule of our culture.”

“But it’s not arbitrary!” Jason insisted. “What about jealousy?” Sarah
opened the door as Jason was struggling to put on his shirt. Jonathan
was standing there and she grabbed his head, gave him a long
faux-passionate kiss, and then closed the door again in his face. “Did
that make you jealous, sweety?” she asked Jason, a tad mockingly he
thought. “Oh, I’m sorry, honey,” she said, making out with him and
sliding a hand down his pants. “Ohhh,” he said. “Well now I’m suddenly
*very* jealous,” he said smiling. She pinched him and ground him against
the wall a bit before going to get the door. “Well, when you get over
it, you know where to find me,” she said, pulling Jonathan inside. “Uh,
who’s that?” Jonathan asked, pointing to Jason. “Oh, he was just going,”
she said, before dragging Jonathan into the bedroom.

* * * * *

Jason tried to get back to work, to figure out the secret code that
allowed one to take over the NNA algorithm, but he just couldn’t focus.
Every time he tried to sit down to do the math, he felt tired or bored
or distracted. All he could think about was Sarah. And all he could
think about that was how anathema to productivity it was.

But there wasn’t much he could do. He couldn’t get Sarah out of his
mind. And even if he could, there she was, just across the office,
smiling as if nothing was wrong, and forcing her way back into his
consciousness. So the next night he went back there. Sarah started
first.

“Oh, Jason, I’m so sorry. I was incredibly rude. I just got so swept up
in the moment, you know?” “Oh, that’s OK. I’m sorry I wasn’t more
understanding of your, um, lifestyle.” “But now?” “I think I can accept
it.” “Oh, Jason,” she said, hugging him, “I’m so glad. I really do like
you.” “And Jon?” “Well, I guess I like him too. Are you OK with that?”
“Yeah, I think so.” “Anything I can do to make it worth your while?” she
asked before kissing him, starting with his lips and then working her
way down his chest.

* * * * *

Jason had heard people say that getting laid made them more productive,
but he always found it a colossal waste of time. Not only the time
wasted with your partner, but also all the time you spent during the day
thinking about the time you’d wasted or the time you would waste in the
future. It made it hard to focus, worst of all now, when something
important was at stake.

He put all thoughts of Sarah out of—Sarah and Jonathan, sitting there,
his muscl—anyway, he put all of that out of his mind and focused on the
problem at hand. How did this sequence of bookmarks lead to that
particular recommendation?

After much procrastination, he cracked the code. There were a series of
accounts, call them dummy0 thru dummy15, and a series of pages, call
them page0 thru page15. dummy0 linked to page0, dummy1 linked to page0
and page1, dummy2 linked to page0, page1, and page2, and so on. Then
dummy15 also linked to an additional page and that was the one that got
pushed out in all the recommendations.

Jason figured that the clustering algorithm must have discovered this
cluster, noticed the odd behavior, and taken it aside for special
processing. Not that anyone could know for sure without untangling all
that code.

* * * * *

Days before, Jason Blakeslee, Google’s head of public relations, and
received a visit from Samuel Turnbill, Google’s head of evangelism. The
meeting was coordinated over Google Email, it was marked in Google
Calendars, it was recorded by Google Video, and held on the Google
campus. In that, it was like many other meetings. And yet, somehow, it
was very different.

“I’m sure you’ll recall NNA,” Samuel began, getting down to business.
“Of course,” Blakeslee said. “Well, it appears someone found a piece of
it that we were hoping to keep hidden.” “Jesus, Sam, would it kill you
to speak clearly? I’m head of public relations, not the public.” “OK,
OK. So here’s how it is: there’s a special control system in NNA that
allows us to exercise some influence over the workings of the algorithm,
for administrative purposes and that sort of thing. Someone else appears
to have discovered the control structure. If this gets out, it could be
incredibly damaging. It *must* be stopped.” “I understand,” Blakeslee
explained. “I’ll put our team on it.” “Thank you,” Samuel said handing
Blakeslee a USB thumb drive. “Here’s a quick explanation and all the
relevant logs.”

And thus the head of evangelism handed the drive to the head of public
relations who handed it to head of sensitive operations who handed it to
his tech lead who handed it to Mike. “Piece of cake,” Mike said.

The logs showed the IP address and time the perp had contacted Google’s
servers with his bookmark request. The IP address was a cable modem used
mainly by one man: a Mr. Jason Barsto. Barsto had a Google account,
which allowed Mike to pull up a pretty decent summary of his entire
life: his email, his calendar, his search history, what news stories he
liked, where he lived, surveillance photos of his house, the top people
he chatted with, and on and on.

Now came the fun part: compiling a dossier. Mike skimmed through
Barsto’s life, with the aid of Google technology that helped highlight
key concepts and messages, getting inside Barsto’s head and trying to
understand who he was.

He started with search. Barsto was a geek, the kind of person who
searched Google every time a thought passed through his head. Within
minutes, he knew everything from what kind of error messages Barsto’s
computer was showing that day to what kind of porn he enjoyed. it was
like a raw feed into his stream-of-consciousness.

Just in the past few hours Barsto had searched for:

    big daddy  
    galaxy halos  
    guitar hero four  
    san francisco library  
    arguments against evolution
    stomach cancer  
    site:mayoclinic.org stomach cancer

Next came email. Using Google technology developed for targetting ads
and improving search, his system pulled out the key concepts and emails
in Barsto’s mailbox. Pretty quickly he learned who Barsto’s friends are,
who his crushes were, who his boss was, and what he did with his free
time. Using his Google Chat logs, he found what Barsto liked to gossip
about and what crazy links he shared with his friends. (Luckily for
Mike, Barsto appeared to be the kind of startup geek who never saw a
Google app he didn’t use.)

Using the calendar, he discovered when Barsto went to the gym, when he
went to see his girlfriend, and so on. Connecting this with the Google
friend-tracking app Barsto had installed on his GPS-enabled phone,
Barsto was able to get solid GPS coordinates for all of these places on
a Google Map as well as see where Barsto was right now. They could
probably ask his phone to record all of his phone calls for them,
although Barsto didn’t have that kind of clearance.

Since Barsto used Google News and YouTube, he got a fairly good sense of
what kinds of things Barsto was interested in and, thanks to Google
Checkout, he was able to see all the recent purchases Barsto had made.
But — and here was the motherload — Barsto ran Google Desktop Search,
which allowed Mike to access any file on Barsto’s computer. He quickly
pulled up Barsto’s full browsing history and got to see what kind of
porn he liked, what blogs he visited, what he was reading about today,
which non-Google apps he used, etc. (For people who didn’t have Google
Desktop Search installed, he got the same data thru Google Web
Accelerator.)

By the end of the day he felt he knew Barsto better than he knew some of
his own best friends. He put the highlights of what he’d learned into a
report for his superiors: Barsto’s name and address, his occupation and
skill-level, his interests and hobbies, his friends and girlfriends, and
(his favorite part) a series of embarrassing or otherwise fun facts that
could be used for blackmail or simply amusement. (You wouldn’t believe
how many people kept naked photos of themselves or loved ones on their
hard drives!)

He sent the report to his superior and wandered off for a bit to dwell
on the power he had as a faceless person deep inside an office park in
Mountain View to know every detail of another person’s life; a person
living just miles north in San Francisco. He wondered what it would be
like if he came across him on the street — here, he would know every
detail of Barsto’s life, from the secrets he confided over IM with his
friends to what he looked like naked, while Barsto would see Mike as
just another random face in the crowd.

Mike loved his job.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Nine](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity9)
