Thoughts on *Citizen Kane*
==========================

July 8, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kane)

* * * * *

In *Three Uses of the Knife*, Mamet quotes Stanislavsky as saying there
are two kinds of play. The kind where the thing is absolutely perfect,
the film ends and you shout “Bravo!” and you’re elated walking out to
the car and then have forgotten the thing entirely by the time you get
home. And the kind where something’s not quite right and so it sticks
with you, gnaws at you, because the notes don’t quite resolve.

*Citizen Kane* is definitely the second kind of movie.

To be sure, it had its moments of sheer genius. Number one, in my mind,
is juxtaposing Welles’ performance as the young Kane gracefully dancing
with a showgirl at an office party against him as a much older Kane
stumbling in the effort to trash a room in his Florida mansion. In both
cases, there’s an absolutely beautiful physicality to the performance
and the notion that the same actor was capable of doing both at the same
age is nothing short of stunning.

The film is widely-hailed for the cinematographic innovation of *deep
focus*, using tricks with projections and lenses to keep foreground and
background in focus at the same time. But the effect is even more
interesting than the technique: the film is filled with long shots where
tons of action goes on through staging but the camera never cuts away. A
character in the foreground talks to a character in the background, they
pace, they swap places, and the camera might pan a bit (but usually not)
but it never cuts.

And when it does cut, it always cuts in a sort of overlapping way. The
standard modern movie shot is the over-over-two-shot: characters A and B
are talking, facing each other; the screen alternates between a shot of
A filmed over the shoulder of B and vice versa. You can clearly see the
people but you lose all sense of the space that they’re in, since your
perspective is constantly flipping back and forth.

*Kane* does pretty much the opposite, almost every new shot overlaps in
some way with the previous one, so you never lose your place. A shot
might go from wide to tight or tight to wide or, in some cases, shift
slightly to the left or right, but it almost never completely flips
direction, and when it does (as when Kane enters the newsroom for the
first time) it flips around a very noticeable piece of the set, so it’s
extremely obvious what happened.

This may have been the result of some deep insecurity about confusing an
audience mostly used to watching plays from fixed seats, but I like it.
The result is to give the film a tremendous physicality that makes it
all feel much more substantial. This sort of thing was apparently
extremely common in the early days of film, which makes me wonder why
it’s so rare now. ([The main modern exception is *There Will Be
Blood*](http://www.davidbordwell.net/blog/2011/02/14/watching-you-watch-there-will-be-blood/),
which was intentionally a period piece.)

But even among older films *Kane* distinguishes itself: most films have
clear staging because they’re simply staged as plays, with a static
camera watching a flat scene. *Kane*’s sets, innovatively, have ceilings
and a full complement of walls and while action feels staged in them
they never really feel like they’re on a stage.

But in the scheme of things, it has to be admitted, these are small
things. *Kane* suffers from far bigger problems. The first, and most
blatant, is that aside from Welles the cast simply cannot act. Well,
they cannot act in movies, at least. Were this a radio show, they would
have been fantastic — close your eyes and you hear nothing but strong,
stirring performances. Were they on stage, they likely also would have
done just fine. But this was their first role in film and apparently no
one stopped to tell them that in the movies, we can see your face.

Their faces are consistently either blank, as if they forgot they were
supposed to move it to and not just their voice, or overwrought, as if
they were exaggerating their features so they would carry through to the
cheap seats. In either case, watching them destroys any sense of realism
that the careful shot construction has built up and brings the whole
thing to the verge of melodrama.

The other big problem is the script. The “spiraling” effect of
overlapping tellings of Kane’s life (a bit like the overlapping cuts, I
suppose?) may have been a brilliant formal innovation, but it doesn’t
really add much to the film. Instead of following the through-line of a
strong and compellng story, we’re constantly bouncing back and forth in
time, with interruptions at key moments. What do these interruptions get
us? As far as I can tell, they just slow the film down.

(The best argument I can make for them is that they emphasize the fact
that Kane drove those who were closest to him away. This makes some
sense for Susan and Jed, but Bernstein is still loyal to him and
Thatcher is dead, so what does that emphasize?)

The modern excuse for this kind of early flash-forward is to set up a
big mystery which only the full story can resolve (*Damages* is an
egregious example). *Kane* kind of does this with the famous “Rosebud”
(although since we see this first-hand, it doesn’t explain why the whole
investigative-obituarist plotline is necessary). Perhaps it was just
terribly spoiled for me, but Rosebud did not feel like a particularly
compelling mystery. Especially with all the questions raised by the
“News on the March” sequence, it was really the last of the things I was
curious about. (And the notion that an editor would be so curious about
it as to waste that much money on an answer really belies the
presentation of journalism in the rest of the film.)

(I’m also upset that the film wasted a great opportunity for the ending.
It currently ends with a speech by the investigative obituarist, saying
that he never figured out what “Rosebud” was but even if he did it was
probably just another ill-fitting piece in the man’s great jigsaw
puzzle. Then the camera pulls out and cuts to a wider shot and cuts
again and eventually cuts to a whole new scene where someone pulls a
sled out of a pile and throws into into a fire and then we cut to the
sled and see the name “Rosebud” as it gets licked with flames. The
obvious ending is to have the camera pull back in one steady shot as we
hear the jigsaw puzzle speech until amidst this enormous pile of junk
the sled is just in foreground, with “Rosebud” written on its side, as
the gaggle of journalists wanders off in background. What’s all this
*deep focus* stuff for if you’re not going to use it for a movie-making
shot like that!)

The film does have some great bits about journalism, but it also has
some weird lapses. There’s hardly anything of substance about the
Spanish-American War, which I would have thought was the most
interesting tale of Hearst’s life. The film is weirdly afraid to leave
the country (it follows Kane to Chicago, but not to Europe) or even the
building (I guess street scenes would have been too expensive), making
it feel a bit cooped-up and claustrophobic.

But the most frustrating thing, script-wise, is that it raises the grand
questions of ambition and money and power and answers them with just a
giant muddle. Kane was incapable of loving but desperate to be loved,
we’re told repeatedly, but what kind of sense does that make? There are
some great moments: in an early precursor of “Fair and Balanced”, Kane
prints a brave “Statement of Principles” promising to always tell the
truth on his front page, just above a story about a murder he invented.
But this is on day one! There is no sense that power corrupts or even,
as Caro would have it, that power reveals. Kane just stay the same
throughout and as his means allow him to grow the size of his gestures,
he also grows the size of his failures. Maybe this is an interesting
philosophical point (don’t count on scale to save you?) but a story so
static doesn’t work particularly well as drama. Caro would have told it
as an epic rise and fall. Kane would have told it as an epic rise. But
Welles just tells it as a flatline. It’s like a Caro subject without the
Caro, or the subject.

I put this criticism last because it’s the one I’m most uncomfortable
about. Maybe Welles was just so far ahead of his time that he decided to
critique the next century of biopics in advance. People don’t actually
change, *Kane* tells us; they just play out the same mistakes on larger
and larger scales, over and over again, in patterns big and small. And
if so, I take it all back and this critique is actually a tremendous
credit. But it sure doesn’t feel like it’s trying to be a
deconstructionist film.
