On DIRFAs
=========

March 4, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dirfas)

* * * * *

You are traveling in a strange and foreign country, where you don’t
speak the language, when you run into a friendly old man who gestures
for you to follow him back to his hut. There he offers you the choice of
one of two different kinds of soup that a woman in the kitchen (his
wife, you presume) has made. You choose one and he pours you a bowl. It
is delicious and you eat the whole thing before bowing deeply and
heading for the door. But he blocks you and stares you down. You’re
puzzled; what does he want? He removes a coin from his pocket and begins
fingering it. He gestures to your own pocket.

You look around and realize you were quite mistaken. This was not a
friendly old man inviting you back to his house for supper — this is a
barker attracting customers to his restaurant! And now, of course, he
wants you to pay.

Now you may pay — perhaps because you feel bad for the old man and woman
and don’t want them to be out money on your account, or perhaps because
you’ve just noticed the menacing broad-shouldered fellow in the corner
with a club — but either way, you pay out of some personal desire: a
desire to help the couple, or avoid the club.

Upon return to the States, you relax from your stressful journey by
heading to your favorite restaurant. The waiter brings you a menu
listing the various options (it is a classy place, so no prices are
marked) and you say that you would prefer one. The waiter eventually
returns with it, you eat it, and it’s delicious.

Now the situation, despite seeming very similar, is somehow entirely
different. You feel an obligation to stay and pay the bill. Not simply
because you don’t want to get arrested, or because you want to be able
to return to the restaurant later. You have a reason to pay the bill
independent of any of your own desires. You must pay the bill because,
by sitting down and ordering, you promised you would.

One cannot accidentally promise, which is why the promise didn’t exist
in the foreign country, but you knew full well that ordering at the
restaurant in the States was a promise to pay full price at the end of
the meal. And by promising, you have created a desire-independent reason
for action, or, as I put it, a DIRFA.

DIRFAs are surely the most amazing and confounding of all of Searle’s
discoveries. It seems crazy to think that there can be some magical
realm, independent of any individual human desire, to which we can be
called to account. And yet, there it is. We pay at the restaurant not
because we want to, or because we want to help certain others, but
because we have committed to doing so and that commitment somehow binds
us.

In his new book, *Making the Social World*, Searle shows that, contrary
to appearances, DIRFAs (like all social institutions) are merely an
outgrowth of language. This is an incredible claim, but Searle makes a
convincing case.

Imagine saying, “Barack Obama is president of the United States.” A
simple, unexceptional act. But simply by doing it, you have entered into
a whole series of social commitments. You have committed that you
believe it. If you said it and did not believe it, people could rightly
criticize you for lying. And your belief commits you to its truth; if it
turned out to be false, people could criticize you for being wrong. You
also commit yourself to communicating this belief; if you mumbled and
your audience misheard you, you could be criticized for being unclear.
If you were speaking to someone who had a friend named Barack Obama and
did not know of the other man with the same name who is currently the US
President, you could be criticized for being confusing.

A simple statement — the physical act consisting of a few vocal cord
vibrations and associated lip movements — has pulled you into a whole
web of social attachments and commitments. To communicate presupposes a
whole system of social ontology.

It is difficult to overstate the implications. Much of political thought
is about why people participate in institutions that do not benefit
them. Why don’t the workers rise up and overthrow capitalism if all they
have to lose are their chains? Is it because hegemony has persuaded them
that the existing order is just and natural? Searle lays the foundations
for a much simpler solution.

Kaczynski argued that the left was the result of oversocialization.
Leftists took the social constraints they were taught — don’t
discriminate on the basis of race, for example — so strongly that they
begin applying them much more widely than the others around them. But
Searle shows how this is a necessary outgrowth of empathy, the left’s
defining traits: social institutions are grounded in a form of
collective intentionality, where others count upon you to obey the
institutional rules. Someone who can better imagine others’ minds must
feel this network of expectations on them to be especially strong.

This book feels like Searle’s last book. It weaves together the entire
scope of his career — from speech acts, to consciousness, to politics —
in a single, stunning answer to this most vexing question: how can we
mere sacks of meat, through brute physical acts, create constructions
(like promises, or money, or corporations) that can then turn around and
bind us. How glorious to see an entire lifetime of work coming together
to answer this question at last.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195396170)

