What Could Happen
=================

October 31, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whatcouldhappen)

* * * * *

My usual attitude is one of skepticism toward politicians. They
routinely disappoint. But, for a moment, let’s take the opposite
scenario. What’s the most that we could hope for?

Barack Obama grew up middle class and black. Obviously intelligent, he
left school knowing he wanted to make a difference, but unsure how.
Inspired by the civil rights movement and SNCC, he joined various
progressive organizations like NYPIRG and worked as a community
organizer.

He then entered law school and graduated highly, but instead of taking a
clerkship went back to Chicago to write a book about race relations and,
later, run a voter registration drive. He taught Constitutional Law and
joined the board of various progressive foundations. He turned his
sights toward politics, where he’s spent the last ten years,
representing largely progressive districts.

Throughout his political career, he has been criticized for being overly
cautious and moderate. But he’s been taken unusual pains to reach out to
left-wing journals (including fairly obscure ones) who have leveled such
criticisms, talked to them personally, and tried to defend himself.

In his presidential campaign, he’s raised hundreds of millions of
dollars, much of it coming from small-dollar donors. He’s built a
grassroots organization never seen before in this country, with millions
of well-coordinated members. Through an incredibly well-executed
campaign and a series of eloquent speeches, he seems poised to take the
presidency with both houses of Congress, a solid majority, and a strong
mandate.

This is unique. He hasn’t spent enough time in politics to get chewed up
by the system. He hasn’t become dependent on a handful of big-money
donors. He comes from a background of progressive politics. And he has
an army of cash and people behind him.

Let’s say he wanted to reform health care, an issue towards the top of
Americans’ minds and a task that’s necessary to balance the budget and
get real wages rising again. The majority of the country supports a
single-payer program, like in every other industrialized nation, but
because of the vast influence of money in politics, it’s often been
considered politically impossible to achieve.

But Obama could pull it off. With his eloquence, he could easily sell
the plan to the country. The Democratic majority in both houses would
get him most of the votes he needed. With his fundraising and volunteer
network, he could threaten to have primary challengers replace any
Congresspeople who disagree. (Obama personally has raised around \$700M.
The average Congressional campaign costs less than \$1M.) With his
tactical shrewdness, he could outwit industry lobbying groups.

Across a wide variety of such issues, it’s possible to imagine a
President Obama getting such things done. He has sufficient skill,
background, and power to pull it off. It’s hard to imagine a similar
situation in history. (FDR, who Obama is often compared to, came from a
very upper-class background and was strongly pulled by the far-left
inspired by the Depression.)

Do I think it will happen? No. The far-right spent these final days
shrieking that Obama is a closet socialist who will take this country
into a new era of single-payer health care, strong financial regulation,
revitalized unions, progressive taxation, a green economy, and universal
voting rights. I wish it were so.

Instead, Obama has proposed the most moderate and cautious plan of all
Democratic candidates, repeatedly refused to make ideological challenges
out of fear of alienating voters, caved on even obvious questions like
illegal wiretapping, surrounded himself with old centrist party hacks,
and spent most of his campaign arguing for vague generalities like
“change” rather than specific policy proposals. So all signs point to
Obama being another cautious moderate.

But the striking thing is that none of these are dispositive. It’s
possible to imagine that, like W, Obama has run a quiet campaign focused
on building an electoral majority which he plans to use to push through
the policies he truly favors. It’s implausible (the hardest thing to
explain away is the FISA vote; even my most hopeful side can’t think of
any decent explanation for that) but it is possible. And it will only be
more likely if we fight for it.

If we don’t it seems Obama’s most likely path is to become what the
left’s pundits call “a more competent steward of empire” — do a bunch of
reasonable, sensible things that will probably have quite positive
effects on the lives of most Americans, while leaving all the
fundamentals untouched. But while that would be a welcome respite from
the past eight years, let’s not squander this rare opportunity for
something more.

[*Now playing:* [Neil Young - “Flags of
Freedom”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h2EDi-QZ4Es)]
