The Fruits of Mass Collaboration
================================

July 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/masscollab)

* * * * *

I often think that the world needs to be a lot more organized. Lots of
people write reviews of television shows, but nobody seems to collect
and organize them all. Good introductory guides to subjects are
essential for learning, yet I only stumble upon them by chance. The
cumulative knowledge of science is one of our most valuable cultural
products, yet it can only be found scattered across thousands of short
articles in hundreds of different journals.

I suspect the same thoughts occur to many of a similar cast of mind,
since there’s so much effort put into discouraging them. The arbiters of
respectable opinion are frequently found to mock such grand projects or
point out deficiencies in them. And a friend of mine explained to me
that soon out of school he nearly killed himself by trying to embark on
such a grand project and now tries to prevent his friends from making
the same mistake.

One can, of course, make the reverse argument: since there is so much
need for such organization projects, they must be pretty impossible. But
upon closer inspection, that isn’t true. Is there a project more grand
than an encyclopedia or a dictionary? Who dares to compress all human
knowledge or an entire language into a single book? And yet, there’s not
just one but several brands of each!

It seems that when the audience is large enough (and just about everyone
has use for encyclopedias and dictionaries), it is possible to take on
grand projects. This suggests that the hold-up is not practical, but
economic. The funding simply isn’t there to do the same for other
things.

But all this is only true for the era of the book, where such a project
means gathering together a group of experts and having them work
full-time to build a Reference Work which can be published and sold
expensively to libraries. I tend to avoid net triumphalism, but the
Internet, it would seem, changes that. Wikipedia was created not by
dedicated experts but by random strangers and while we can complain
about its deficiencies, all admit that it’s a useful service.

The Internet is the first medium to make such projects of mass
collaboration possible. Certainly numerous people send quotes to Oxford
for compilation in the Oxford English Dictionary, but a full-time staff
is necessary sort and edit these notes to build the actual book (not to
mention all the other work that must be done). On the Internet, however,
the entire job — collection, summarization, organization, and editing —
can be done in spare time by mutual strangers.

An even more striking, but less remarked-upon, example is Napster.
Within only months, almost as a by-product, the world created the most
complete library of music and music catalog data ever seen. The
contributors to this project didn’t even realize they were doing this!
They all thought they were simply grabbing music for their own personal
use. Yet the outcome far surpassed anything consciously attempted.

The Internet fundamentally changes the practicalities of large
organization projects. Things that previously seemed silly and
impossible, like building [a detailed guide to every television
show](http://tviv.org/) are now being done as a matter of course. It
seems like we’re in for an explosion of such modern reference works,
perhaps with new experiments into tools for making them.
