The False Consciousness Falsehood
=================================

May 19, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/falsecon)

* * * * *

American intellectual life has a large number of ways of responding to
an argument without actually addressing its substance — namecalling in
other words. You can say that someone is “blaming the victim” or
spinning a “conspiracy theory” or “assuming people are stupid” or that
they’re subject to “false consciousness”.

Most of these are kind of transparently silly, but even otherwise smart
people seem to think the false consciousness charge has some heft to it.
The argument is never fully spelled-out, but the argument seems to be
that to think that people are systematically mistaken about their own
interests is the kind of crazy idea that only vulgar Marxists would
believe and, furthermore, it requires assuming that people are stupid
and explaining how you’ve been able to see past the illusion.

Well, I’m personally not under any illusion that providing a rational
explanation is going to stop people from leveling this charge, but I
figure one ought to, if only to set the record straight.

Let’s begin with a parable — a simplified case that will at least
establish whether some of these arguments are logically true. Imagine a
new regime comes to power that decides to imprison everyone with red
hair. They insist that there is nothing amiss about this — they were
elected democratically, and furthermore, everyone imprisoned is still
allowed to vote. But inside the prisons, they only permit limited
contact with the outside world. Most prisoners only watch the one
prison-provided news station which is systematically biased, constantly
suggesting that the Purple Party is in favor of additional rights for
red-haired people while their opponents, the Yellow Party, just used the
red-haired issue for pandering. (Anyone who’s watched, say, Fox News
discuss black issues will know how this is possible.) The result is that
when election time rolls around, the majority of red-haired prisoners
vote for the Purple Party candidate who gets into power and provides no
new rights for them.

Call it false consciousness or not, I think it’s perfectly reasonable to
look at this situation and say while the red-haired prisoners are not
stupid, they are systematically mistaken, which is leading them to act
against their own interests. If they knew the truth they would vote for
the Yellow Party, the party which wants to take steps to get them out of
prison, instead. Furthermore, it’s possible to imagine that there are
some prisoners who, through one means or another, have learned this and
thus are able to see this situation while the other prisoners do not.
(They try to tell the other prisoners what’s going on, but they keep
getting labeled conspiracy theorists.)

Now obviously vast portions of America are not imprisoned. But most
people do get their news from a small number of sources and I think
everyone would agree that, in one way or another, these sources are
systematically biased. (You can argue about which way they’re biased or
whether it makes a difference, but I think it’s pretty clear that all
the major news sources share a general conception of what is “news” and
what isn’t.) So why is it so implausible that something similar is going
on?

The major difference between the two scenarios is that in the first,
people were basically forced to watch the biased news, while in the real
world they have lots of other alternatives. But I’m not sure this
matters as much as it might seem at first.

First, most people have busy lives that don’t revolve around the news or
politics and thus are going to get the news in the most convenient form
they can. For most people, this is typically television or the
newspaper. But starting a new television station or newspaper is very
expensive, especially if you want it to have wide reach, and the only
projects that can get funding and advertising are those that buy into at
least some of the systematic biases. So for most people, there simply
isn’t a better alternative when it comes to the formats they want.

Second, even if someone gets their news from the Internet or another
source where getting started is less expensive, they may not know about
the alternatives. If you grew up with your parents reading the *New York
Times* you may simply live your life checking in on nytimes.com, without
ever stopping to wonder whether the news you were getting was
systematically biased and whether there was some more preferable
alternative.

Again, just as there was no way for the prisoners to know they were
being lied to, it’s not really reasonable for the average person to
figure out that they’re getting biased news if the only news they read
comes from biased sources.

Now I’m not arguing here that this idea is *true* (that would require
more real-world evidence), merely that it’s possible. The fact is that
we live in a world where most people get their information about what’s
going on from a very small number of sources which tend to report
largely the same things in the same way. This seems like a rather
important fact of life and I think we ought to stop dismissing
suggestions that it might have some negative effects on people out of
hand.
