Our Next Superjumbo
===================

July 20, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/superjumbo)

* * * * *

![Book cover](image1_superjumbo)The question seems rather less important
now, but for a while I was working on a book about politics, especially
how the Democrats could win elections. For those out there interested in
the question, Rick Perlstein (author of *Before the Storm*, the
highly-praised history of the rise of the Republican right) has written
what is pretty much the definitive piece on the subject, now in
paperback as *The Stock Ticker and the Superjumbo*.

In short: Perlstein recounts the strong evidence that there is very
broad support for the economic platform of the Democrats. Nonvoters,
independents, and even Republicans, he notes, support core Democratic
principles. They just don’t consider themselves Democrats, a party they
think of as not standing for anything in particular. This is, of course,
because Democrats have been busy chasing after the mirage of swing
voters, running further and further to the right, following the ball
Republicans are glefully pulling in front of them.

He argues that instead, the Democrats must build a strong and long-term
political identity, building a new political landscape instead of trying
to win on the old one, just as the right-wing Republicans did. Doing so
requires a openness to the possibility of losing, at least initially,
but in the end it is the only way to win.

This artless summary doesn’t convey the depth of Perlstein’s piece, so
if you’re interested you can:

-   [Read it online](http://www.bostonreview.net/BR29.3/perlstein.html)
    at the *Boston Review*, where it was originally published
-   [Buy the
    book](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0976147505/coolbooks02/)
-   [Buy *Before the
    Storm*](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809028581/coolbooks02)

More thoughts:

-   Boston Review: [Various responses and Perlstein’s
    rebuttal](http://bostonreview.net/BR29.3/contents.html)
-   Crooked Timber: [Market Making versus Market Taking in
    Politics](http://crookedtimber.org/2005/06/24/market-making-versus-market-taking-in-politics/)
    (feat. comments by Perlstein)

A final note: Why is all this uninteresting? Because the Democrats
aren’t paid to win elections. They’re paid to win policy for their
corporate donors. Policy that hurts those companies, however popular
with the public, simply will not be funded.

[image1_superjumbo]: image1_superjumbo.jpg