Fighting Back: Responses to the Mainstream Media
================================================

June 15, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting7)

* * * * *

*[This is part 7 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4), [part
five](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5), and [part
six](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6).]*

Unlike the conservative media, it does not appear the national media is
intentionally partisan. But it exists in a very specific structural
context. A recent study found that two-thirds of journalists thought
bottom-line pressure was “seriously hurting the quality of news
coverage” while around half reported their newsrooms had been cut. 75%
of print and 85% of broadcast journalists agreed that “too little
attention is paid to complex
issues.”[†](http://people-press.org/reports/pdf/214topline.pdf) When
you’re short on staff and stories are shallow, reporters become even
more dependent on outside sources — and the right-wing think tanks are
more than willing to help out, while further pulling coverage to the
right.

But one obvious solution — creating a matching set of left-wing think
tanks — while perhaps helpful in balancing the debate, will not solve
the problem. Media norms of balance mean that even qualified experts
will always be presented as “just one side of the story,” balanced
directly against inaccurate conservatives — recall how the handful of
corporate-funded global warming deniers are still balanced against the
overwhelming scientific consensus.

Ideally, viewers would be able to hear both perspectives and decide
which they thought was accurate. But since, as the journalists conceded,
so little time is spent explaining complex issues, in practice very
little information is presented that can help the viewer decide who’s
correct. So they’re left to decide based on their existing ideological
preferences, further splitting the country into two alternate realities.

Figuring out what is true — especially when it’s so obvious, as in the
examples above — is precisely what the mainstream media should be doing.
Partisan pundits would be replaced with thoughtful scholars.
Non-peer-reviewed books would be ignored, not endlessly promoted.
Scientific facts would be given precedence over political arguments.
Political commentary would be replaced by factual education.

Don’t hold your breath. Six major companies own nearly 90% of all media
outlets.[†](http://www.thevoicenews.com/news/2003/0411/Front_Page/C06_LaVoie-media.html)
And they — and their advertisers — don’t mind how things are going.
Sumner Redstone, CEO of Viacom (Paramount, CBS, Blockbuster, MTV, Comedy
Central, etc.), told a group of CEOs that “I look at the election from
what’s good for Viacom. I vote for what’s good for Viacom.” And, “from a
Viacom standpoint, the election of a Republican administration is a
better deal. Because the Republican administration has stood for many
things we believe in, deregulation and so
on.”[†](http://www.opinionjournal.com/extra/?id=110005669) Better news
reporting wouldn’t just be more expensive, it would threaten these
business interests.

To get the straight story, it’s necessary to turn to independent and
community sources which don’t have such conflicts of interest. One
possibility is the daily news show *Democracy Now!*, hosted by Amy
Goodman, which is funded only by viewers and foundations. Broadcast on
150 radio stations, 150 television stations, and the Internet, the show
presents stories from activists, journalists, authors, and public
interest organizations from around the world.

When outlets from ABC to the *New York Times* began claiming Iraq had
weapons of mass destruction, *Democracy Now!* was one of the few sources
to take a contrary view. It presented the testimony of Iraq’s top
weapons official, who defected to the US and explained that all the
weapons had been destroyed. (Other stations, ironically, parroted the
Bush administration in promoting the information he presented about the
weapons Iraq *had*, without mentioning they had been
destroyed.)[†](http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=03/04/07/0320205)

And when US soldiers kidnapped Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the
democratically-elected president of Haiti, and flew him to the Central
African Republic where they locked him in a hotel room, he managed to
quietly phone out while armed guards stood outside his door. *Democracy
Now!* was alone in airing his incredible story. When Aristide was
finally freed, he insisted on returning to his country and again Amy
Goodman was the only US television journalist who dared to accompany him
back.[†](http://www.democracynow.org/article.pl?sid=04/03/01/1521216&mode=thread&tid=25)

Still, *Democracy Now!*’s audience is rather small compared to that of
the mainstream media. But stories from overseas hint at what could
happen if enough people begun paying attention to such sources. In South
Korea, the country with the highest rate of broadband adoption, politics
has been turned upside down by OhmyNews, a five-year-old website.
Founded by Oh Yeon Ho, OhymyNews has a feature unlike any other paper:
more than 85% of its stories are contributed by
readers.[†](http://www.siliconvalley.com/mld/siliconvalley/business/columnists/5889390.htm)

Almost anyone can write for OhmyNews: the site posts 70% of all stories
that are submitted, over 15,000 citizen-reporters have published
stories. OhmyNews copyedits their work but tries to leave their
differing styles intact. The citizen-reporters write about things they
know about and that interest them, together they end up covering most of
the traditional spectrum. Yet their new voices end up providing coverage
on things which typically get ignored by the mainstream
media.[†](http://english.ohmynews.com/articleview/article_view.asp?article_class=8&no=201599&rel_no=1)

This is most evident in their political coverage. Before OhmyNews,
conservatives controlled 80% of Korea’s newspaper circulation. Then
OhmyNews gave a voice to progressives, inspiring massive nationwide
protests against the government. The protests, in turn, led to the
election of reformist Roh Moo Hyun, now known as “the first Internet
president.”[†](http://english.ohmynews.com/articleview/article_view.asp?article_class=8&no=201599&rel_no=1)
The furious conservative National Assembly responded by voting to
impeach Roh on technical grounds. OhmyNews readers again organized and
overthrew the Assembly in the next election, reinstating Roh. There’s no
reason why what happened in South Korea can’t happen here. Overcoming
the tide of misinformation is hard work, but working together committed
citizens can make amazing progress, even when up against the most
powerful interests. Out society has an extraordinary level of freedom
and openness. Whether we use that freedom to seek out the truth or
remain content with conventional platitudes is up to us.

*Note to readers:* Citations have been added to the previous articles in
the series.
