A Non-Programmer’s Apology
==========================

May 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nonapology)

* * * * *

In his classic *A Mathematicians Apology*, published 65 years ago, the
great mathematician G. H. Hardy wrote that “A man who sets out to
justify his existence and his activities” has only one real defense,
namely that “I do what I do because it is the one and only thing that I
can do at all well.” “I am not suggesting,” he added,

> that this is a defence which can be made by most people, since most
> people can do nothing at all well. But it is impregnable when it can
> be made without absurdity … If a man has any genuine talent he should
> be ready to make almost any sacrifice in order to cultivate it to the
> full.

Reading such comments one cannot help but apply them to oneself, and so
I did. Let us eschew humility for the sake of argument and suppose that
I am a great programmer. By Hardy’s suggestion, the responsible thing
for me to do would be to cultivate and use my talents in that field, to
spend my life being a great programmer. And that, I have to say, is a
prospect I look upon with no small amount of dread.

* * * * *

It was not always quite this way. For quite a while programming was
basically my life. And then, somehow, I drifted away. At first it was
small steps — discussing programming instead of doing it, then
discussing things *for* programmers, and then discussing other topics
altogether. By the time I reached the end of my first year in college,
when people were asking me to program for them over the summer, I hadn’t
programmed in so long that I wasn’t even sure I really could. I
certainly did not think of myself as a particularly good programmer.

Ironic, considering Hardy writes that

> Good work is not done by ‘humble’ men. It is one of the first duties
> of a professor, for example, in any subject, to exaggerate a little
> both the importance of his subject and his own importance in it. A man
> who is always asking ‘Is what I do worthwhile?’ and ‘Am I the right
> person to do it?’ will always be ineffective himself and a
> discouragement to others. He must shut his eyes a little and think a
> little more of his subject and himself than they deserve. This is not
> too difficult: it is harder not to make his subject and himself
> ridiculous by shutting his eyes too tightly.

Perhaps, after spending so much time not programming, the blinders had
worn off. Or perhaps it was the reverse: that I had to convince myself
that I was good at what I was doing now, and, since that thing was not
programming, by extension, that I was not very good at programming.

Whatever the reason, I looked upon the task of actually having to
program for three months with uncertainty and trepidation. For days, if
I recall correctly, I dithered. Thinking myself incapable of serious
programming, I thought to wait until my partner arrived and instead
spend my time assisting him. But days passed and I realized it would be
weeks before he would appear, and I finally decided to try to program
something in the meantime.

To my shock, it went amazingly well and I have since become convinced
that I’m a pretty good programmer, if lacking in most other areas. But
now I find myself faced with this dilemma: it is those other areas I
would much prefer to work in.

* * * * *

The summer before college [I learned
something](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/epiphany) that struck me as
incredibly important and yet known by very few. It seemed clear to me
that the only responsible way to live my life would be to do something
that would only be done by someone who knew this thing — after all,
there were few who did and many who didn’t, so it seemed logical to
leave most other tasks to the majority.

I concluded that the best thing to do would be to attempt to explain
this thing I’d learned to others. Any specific task I could do with the
knowledge would be far outweighed by the tasks done by those I’d
explained the knowledge to.^[1](#fn:1)^ It was only after I’d decided on
this course of action (and perhaps this is the blinders once again) that
it struck me that explaining complicated ideas was actually something
I’d always loved doing and was really pretty good at.

That aside, having spent the morning reading David Foster
Wallace^[2](#fn:2)^, it is plain that I am no great writer. And so,
reading Hardy, I am left wondering whether my decision is somehow
irresponsible.

I am saved, I think, because it appears that Hardy’s logic to some
extent parallels mine. Why is it important for the man who “can bat
unusually well” to become “a professional cricketer”? It is, presumably,
because those who can bat unusually well are in short supply and so the
few who are gifted with that talent should do us all the favor of making
use of it. If those whose “judgment of the markets is quick and sound”
become cricketers, while the good batters become stockbrokers, we will
end up with mediocre cricketers and mediocre stockbrokers. Better for
all of us if the reverse is the case.

But this, of course, is awfully similar to the logic I myself employed.
It is important for me to spend my life explaining what I’d learned
because people who had learned it are in short supply — much shorter
supply, in fact (or so it appears), than people who can bat well.

* * * * *

However, there is also an assumption hidden in that statement. It only
makes sense to decide what to become based on what you can presently do
if you believe that abilities are somehow granted innately and can
merely be cultivated, not created in themselves. This is a fairly common
view, although rarely consciously articulated (as indeed Hardy takes it
for granted), but not one that I subscribe to.

Instead, it seems plausible that talent is made through practice, that
those who are good batters are that way after spending enormous
quantities of time batting as a kid.^[3](#fn:3)^ Mozart, for example,
was the son of “one of Europe’s leading musical teachers”^[4](#fn:4)^
and said teacher began music instruction at age three. While I am
plainly no Mozart, several similarities do seem apparent. My father had
a computer programming company and he began showing me how to use the
computer as far back as I can remember.

The extreme conclusion from the theory that there is no innate talent is
that there is no difference between people and thus, as much as
possible, we should get people to do the most important tasks (writing,
as opposed to cricket, let’s say). But in fact this does not follow.

Learning is like compound interest. A little bit of knowledge makes it
easier to pick up more. Knowing what addition is and how to do it, you
can then read a wide variety of things that use addition, thus knowing
even more and being able to use that knowledge in a similar
manner.^[5](#fn:5)^ And so, the growth in knowledge
accelerates.^[6](#fn:6)^ This is why children who get started on
something at a young age, as Mozart did, grow up to have such an
advantage.

And even if (highly implausibly) we were able to control the
circumstances in which all children grew up so as to maximize their
ability to perform the most important tasks, that still would not be
enough, since in addition to aptitude there is also interest.

Imagine the three sons of a famous football player. All three are raised
similarly, with athletic activity from their earliest days, and thus
have an equal aptitude for playing football. Two of them pick up this
task excitedly, while one, despite being good at it, is
uninterested^[7](#fn:7)^ and prefers to read books.^[8](#fn:8)^ It would
not only be unfair to force him to use his aptitude and play football,
it would also be unwise. Someone whose heart isn’t in it is unlikely to
spend the time necessary to excel.

* * * * *

And this, in short^[9](#fn:9)^, is the position I find myself in. I
don’t *want* to be a programmer. When I look at programming books, I am
more tempted to mock them than to read them. When I go to programmer
conferences, I’d rather skip out and talk politics than programming. And
writing code, although it can be enjoyable, is hardly something I want
to spend my life doing.

Perhaps, I fear, this decision deprives society of one great programmer
in favor of one mediocre writer. And let’s not hide behind the cloak of
uncertainty, let’s say we know that it does. Even so, I would make it.
The writing is too important, the programming too unenjoyable.

And for that, I apologize.

### Notes

* * * * *

1.  Explaining what that knowledge is, naturally, a larger project and
    must wait for another time. [↩](#fnref:1)

2.  You can probably see DFW’s influence on this piece, not least of
    which in these footnotes. [↩](#fnref:2)

3.  Indeed, this apparently parallels the views of the psychologists who
    have studied the question. Anders Ericsson, a psychology professor
    who studies “expert performance”, told the *New York Times Magazine*
    that “the most general claim” in his work “is that a lot of people
    believe there are some inherent limits they were born with. But
    there is surprisingly little hard evidence … .” The conclusion that
    follows, the *NYTM* notes, is that “when it comes to choosing a life
    path, you should do what you love — because if you don’t love it,
    you are unlikely to work hard enough to get very good. Most people
    naturally don’t like to do things they aren’t ‘good’ at. So they
    often give up, telling themselves they simply don’t possess the
    talent for math or skiing or the violin. But what they really lack
    is the desire to be good and to undertake the deliberate practice
    that would make them
    better.”[†](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/07/magazine/07wwln_freak.html?ex=1148875200&en=611751da74b96d1b&ei=5070) [↩](#fnref:3)

4.  The quote is [from
    Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfgang_Amadeus_Mozart)
    where, indeed, the other facts are drawn from as well, the idea
    having been suggested by Stephen Jay Gould’s essay “Mozart and
    Modularity”, collected in his book *Eight Little
    Piggies*. [↩](#fnref:4)

5.  I’ve always thought that this was the reason kids (or maybe just me)
    especially disliked history. Every other field — biology, math, art
    — had at least some connection to the present and thus kids had some
    foundational knowledge to build on. But history? We simply weren’t
    there and thus know absolutely nothing of it. [↩](#fnref:5)

6.  It was tempting to write that “the rate of growth” accelerates, but
    that would mean something rather different. [↩](#fnref:6)

7.  Many people, of course, are uninterested in such things precisely
    because they aren’t very good at them. There’s nothing like repeated
    failures to turn you way from an activity. Perhaps this is another
    reason to start young — young children might be less stung by
    failure, as little is expected from them. [↩](#fnref:7)

8.  I apologize for the clichédness of this example. [↩](#fnref:8)

9.  Well, shorter than most DFW. [↩](#fnref:9)


