Meeting Peter Singer
====================

November 13, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/petersinger)

* * * * *

I remember watching an episode of *Penn & Teller* about animal rights.
As usual, the show mostly consisted of a long series of clips relating
to animal rights, followed by comments from Penn making fun of the idea.
This show, I recall, was particularly weak. They didn’t even pretend to
make an argument; it was entirely mockery.

Watching this, I couldn’t help but realize there was a powerful logical
argument at the core of the animal rights groups: animals should be
treated much the same way humans are — their lives should be respected,
their pain minimized, etc. Make this one simple change to your system of
morality and everything else falls into place. PETA actually seems kind
of measured when they refer to “the Holocaust on your plate”.

Peter Singer is the moral philosopher who has probably done the most to
promote this idea. With a wide-ranging career spanning from Marx to
meat, his book *Animal Liberation*, which quietly and thoughtfully makes
this case, is widely-regarded as launching the animal liberation
movement.

I was recently dragged to the Boston Vegetarian Festival to see Singer
speak about his new book, *The Way We Eat*, and was deeply impressed by
his thoughtfulness and clarity of mind. An aging fellow with thoughtful
glasses, he looks like Noam Chomsky, another plainspoken professor. He
is not a passionate activist who has taken on the cause of animals, but
simply what he appears: a moral philosopher who started thinking about
the issue one day and drew the logical conclusions.

After his talk, a woman in the audience asked a question about the
rumors that he would sometimes eat non-vegan food. The audience was
scandalized. “Let me address that,” Singer said. “I don’t believe in
veganism as a religion. I simply believe that refraining from eating
animal products is the most effective way of putting pressure on
producers to stop abusing and killing animals. Sometimes, if a host
misunderstands my request and makes non-vegan food, instead of throwing
it away, I will eat it. I don’t think this is a problem, because I don’t
think this does any moral harm.”

Another person asked how he could say good things about Whole Foods when
they were still serving numerous animal products. “Whole Foods has the
best standards for animal treatment of any major organization,” he
replied. “That’s simply a fact. And, I think it’s a good thing. Do I
think not using animals at all would be even better? Of course. But I
praise people for the good things they do and condemn them for the bad
ones.”

A final question raised the incrementalism versus revolutionism debate
common to all left-wing social movements. Should one really worry about
animal treatment when the animals were still going to be killed? Pinger
said the answer was undoubtedly yes. “Look, I thought that when *Animal
Liberation* came out everyone would read it and become a vegan. But it’s
been thirty years and vegans are still less than 10% of the population.
If you genuinely care about animal suffering, you have to admit that,
and say, ‘what else can we do to ease animal suffering?’”

After Singer’s talk, I began thinking through the consequences of his
morality. A question occurred to me: “Should we also stop animals from
eating each other?” I was sure others had made such arguments as
*reductio ad absurdums* of vegetarianism, but I thought I might be the
first to be genuinely interested in it from a moral perspective.

“Of course not,” said my friend. “It’s not our fault if the animals kill
each other.” “You mean,” I said, “that you think it’s perfectly moral to
let that guy” — I pointed at a random guy nearby — “go around killing
people?” “Well, OK,” he said. “But it’s different with animals, because
they don’t know any better.” “You mean it would be OK to let him go
around killing people if he was mentally ill and didn’t realize he was
doing it?” “You should go ask Singer,” he said.

So I did — he was signing books outside the lecture hall and as the line
ended I asked him my question. His answer was even better than I
imagined: “We would if we knew how to do so without making things worse
and disturbing the ecosystems and so on.” “Thanks!” I said, impressed.
He spied the large white book I was hugging to my chest. “Are you
reading Kolakowski?” he asked. “Yep,” I said smiling. “Had to read that
when I was studying Marx a long time ago. It’s heavy,” he said. “Quite
literally!” I replied, hefting the 1200 page book. He smiled.

“I have to say, though,” I said, feeling guilty, “that I don’t agree
with your *Darwinian Left* stuff.” “That’s OK,” he replied. “You don’t
need to agree with everything I write.” Then he wandered off, looking
for the next thing to see.

I had to get that off my chest, because it was the one thing bugging me
about Singer. Somehow later in life Singer had become a sociobiologist,
one of that vulgar group of psuedoscientists who insist — despite all
evidence — that humans are genetically programmed to do all everything a
right-wing politician could imagine. (Sociobiology having gotten a bad
name, they now call themselves evolutionary psychologists.)

In his book *A Darwinian Left*, however, Singer explains that this is no
reason for the left to despair. If people are actually born stupid,
that’s only *more* justification for left-wing policies. We need to
provide the stupid people with the extra resources to live on equal
terms as the smart people. Steven Pinker cites this book (along with
Singer’s *The Expanding Circle*) several times in his execrable *Blank
Slate* to prove that his noxious views aren’t necessarily right-wing.
(Neither Pinker nor Singer, of course, provide any real evidence to show
this actually is the way humans are.)

That said, as usual Singer’s conclusions do follow from his premises —
if you do make that one small change to the way you think the world
works, then his conclusions about what we should do to remedy it
undoubtedly follow. I just wish he’d check his assumptions.

That aside, it seems unfair to dismiss Singer on the basis of a small
blemish on an incredibly long and varied career — *Wikipedia* lists over
forty books he’s written or co-authored. His thoughtfulness and clarity
in sharing it is an example to us all.
