Saving Business: The Origins of Right-Wing Think Tanks
======================================================

June 10, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting5)

* * * * *

*[This is part 5 of an article on the power of right-wing think tanks.
See also [part one](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting1), [part
two](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting2), [part
three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting3), and [part
four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting4).]*

Since the goal of these think tanks clearly isn’t to advance knowledge,
what are they for? To understand their real goals, we have to look at
why they were created. After the tumultuous 1960s led a generation of
students to start questioning authority, business decided something had
to be done. “The American economic system,” explained Lewis Powell in a
1971 memo for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, “is under broad attack” from
“perfectly respectable elements of society: from the college campus, the
pulpit, the media, the intellectual and literary journals, the arts and
sciences, and from politicians.”

And business has no one to blame but itself for not getting these things
under control: the colleges are funded by “contributions from capital
funds controlled or generated by American business. The boards of
trustees … overwhelmingly are composed of men and women who are leaders
in the system.” And the media “are owned and theoretically controlled by
corporations which depend upon profits, and the enterprise system to
survive.” So business must “conduct guerilla warfare” by “establishing a
staff of highly qualified scholars” who can be paid to publish a “steady
flow of scholarly articles” in magazines and journals as well as books
and pamphlets to be published “at airports, drugstores, and
elsewhere.”[†](http://reclaimdemocracy.org/corporate_accountability/powell_memo_lewis.html)

William Simon, president of the right-wing Olin Foundation (the same one
that later funded Brock) was more blunt: “The only thing that can save
the Republican Party … is a counter-intelligentsia. … [Conservative
scholars] must be given grants, grants, and more grants in exchange for
books, books, and more books.” (*Blinded By the Right*, 78)

The Powell memo was incredibly influential. Soon after it was written,
business began following its advice, building up its network of think
tanks, news outlets, and media pressure groups. These organizations
begun to dot the landscape, hiding behind respectable names like the
Manhattan Institute or the Heartland Foundation. While these
institutions were all funded by partisan conservatives, news accounts
rarely noted this fact. (Another FAIR study finds The Heritage
Foundation’s political orientation — let alone its funding — was only
identified in 24% of news
citations.)[†](http://www.fair.org/extra/9805/think-tanks.html)

As the conservative message machine grew stronger, political debate and
electoral results begun to shift further and further to the right,
eventually allowing extreme conservatives to be elected, first with
Ronald Reagan and now with George W. Bush. More recently, conservatives
have managed to finally win not only the White House but both houses of
Congress. While their policy proposals, when understood, are just as
unpopular as ever, conservatives are able to use their media power to
twist the debate.

*Next:* [Part 6: Hurting Seniors](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/shifting6)
