Believe you can change
======================

August 18, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dweck)

* * * * *

*This post is part two of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

Carol Dweck was obsessed with failure. You know how some people just
seem to succeed at everything they do, while others seem helpless,
doomed to a life of constant failure? Dweck noticed that too — and she
was determined to figure out why. So she began watching kids, trying to
see if she could spot the difference between the two groups.

In a 1978 study with Carol Diener, she gave kids various puzzles and
recorded what they said as they tried to solve them. Very quickly, the
helpless kids started blaming themselves: “I’m getting confused,” one
said; “I never did have a good rememory,” another explained.

But the puzzles kept coming — and they kept getting harder. “This isn’t
fun anymore,” the kids cried. But still, there were more puzzles.

The kids couldn’t take it anymore. “I give up,” they insisted. They
started talking about other things, trying to take their mind off the
onslaught of tricky puzzles. “There is a talent show this weekend, and I
am going to be Shirley Temple,” one girl said. Dweck just gave them even
harder puzzles.

Now the kids started getting silly, almost as if they could hide their
failure by making it clear they weren’t trying in the first place.
Despite repeatedly being told it was incorrect, one boy just kept
choosing brown as his answer, saying “Chocolate cake, chocolate
cake.”^[1](#fn:dweck78)^

Maybe these results aren’t surprising. If you’ve ever tried to play a
board game with kids, you’ve probably seen them say all these things and
more (Dweck appears to be missing the part where they pick up the game
board and throw all the pieces on the floor, then run away screaming).

But what shocked her — and changed the course of her career — was the
behavior of the successful kids. “Everyone has a role model, someone who
pointed the way at a critical moment in their lives,” she later wrote.
“These children were my role models. They obviously knew something I
didn’t and I was determined to figure it out.”^[2](#fn:mindset1)^

Dweck, like many adults, had learned to hide her frustration and anger,
to politely say “I’m not sure I want to play this anymore” instead of
knocking over the board. She figured the successful kids would be the
same — they’d have tactics for coping with failure instead of getting
beaten down by it.

But what she found was radically different. The successful kids didn’t
just live with failure, they *loved* it! When the going got tough, they
didn’t start blaming themselves; they licked their lips and said “I love
a challenge.” They’d say stuff like “The harder it gets the harder I
need to try.”

Instead of complaining it wasn’t fun when the puzzles got harder, they’d
psych themselves up, saying “I’ve almost got it now” or “I did it
before, I can do it again.” One kid, upon being a given a really hard
puzzle, one that was supposed to be obviously impossible to solve, just
looked up at the experimenter with a smile and said, “You know, I was
*hoping* this would be informative.”^[3](#fn:dweckleggett)^

*What was wrong with them?*

* * * * *

The difference, Dweck discovered, was one of mindset. Dweck had always
thought “human qualities were carved in stone. You were smart or you
weren’t, and failure meant you weren’t.” That was why the helpless kids
couldn’t take it when they started failing. It just reminded them they
sucked (they easily got confused, they had “a bad rememory”). Of course
it wasn’t fun anymore — why would it be fun to get constantly reminded
you’re a failure? No wonder they tried to change the subject. Dweck
called this the “fixed mindset” — the belief that your abilities are
fixed and that the world is just a series of tests that show you how
good you are.

The successful kids believed precisely the opposite: that everything
came through effort and that the world was full of interesting
challenges that could help you learn and grow. (Dweck called this the
“growth mindset.”) That’s why they were so thrilled by the harder
puzzles — the easier ones weren’t any sort of challenge, there was
nothing you could learn from them. But the really tough ones? Those were
fascinating — a new skill to develop, a new problem to conquer. In later
experiments, kids even asked to take puzzles home so they could work on
them some more.^[4](#fn:muellerdweck)^

It took a seventh-grader to explain it to her: “I think intelligence is
something you have to work for…it isn’t just given to you… Most kids, if
they’re not sure of an answer, will not raise their hand… But what I
usually do is raise my hand, because if I’m wrong, then my mistake will
be corrected. Or I will raise my hand and say… ‘I don’t get this. Can
you help me?’ Just by doing that I’m increasing my
intelligence.”^[5](#fn:m2)^

In the fixed mindset, success comes from proving how great you are.
Effort is a bad thing — if you have to try hard and ask questions, you
obviously can’t be very good. When you find something you *can* do well,
you want to do it over and over, to show how good you are at it.

In the growth mindset, success comes from growing. Effort is what it’s
all about — it’s what makes you grow. When you get good at something,
you put it aside and look for something harder so that you can keep
growing.

Fixed-mindset people feel smart when they don’t make mistakes,
growth-mindset people feel smart when they struggle with something for a
long time and then finally figure it out. Fixies try to blame the world
when things go bad, growthers look to see what they can change about
themselves. Fixies are afraid to try hard — because if they fail, it
means they’re a failure. Growthers are afraid of not trying.

* * * * *

As Dweck continued her research, she kept finding this difference in all
sorts of places. In relationships, growth-mindset people looked for
partners who would push them to be better, fixies just wanted someone
who would put them on a pedestal (and got into terrible fights when they
hit problems). Growther CEOs keep looking for new products and ways to
improve, fixies cut research and tried to squeeze profits from old
successes. Even in sports, growther athletes got better and better
through constant practice, while fixies blamed their atrophying skills
on everyone around them.

But Dweck applied a growth mindset to the question of mindset — and
discovered that your mindset could itself be changed. Even small
interventions — like telling students they were doing well because they
tried hard, rather than because they were smart — had huge effects. With
more work, she could change totally fixed-mindset people into fervent
growth-mindset ones.

She herself changed, converting from a fervent fixed-mindsetter, always
looking for excuses to prove how smart she was, to a growther, looking
for new challenges. It was hard: “since I was taking more risks, I might
look back over the day and see all the mistakes and setbacks. And feel
miserable. [You feel like a zero]… you want to rush right out and rack
up some high numbers.” But she resisted the urge — and became a leading
psychologist instead.^[6](#fn:m3)^

* * * * *

The first step to getting better is believing you *can* get better. In
her book, *[Mindset](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0345472322)*, Dweck
explains how to start talking back to your fixed mindset. The fixed
mindset says, “What if you fail? You’ll be a failure.” The growth
mindset replies, “Most successful people had failures along the
way.”^[7](#fn:site)^

Now when I first heard about this work, I just thought: that’s nice, but
I already do all this. I believe fervently that intelligence can change
and that talents can be learned. Indeed, I’d say I’m almost
pathologically growth mindset. But even I began to notice there are some
things I have a fixed mindset about.

For example, I used to think I was introverted. Everyone had always told
me that you were either an extroverted person or an introverted person.
From a young age, I was quite shy and bookish, so it seemed obvious: I
was an introvert.

But as I’ve grown, I’ve found that’s hardly the end of the story. I’ve
started to get good at leading a conversation or cracking people up with
a joke. I *like* telling stories at a party a story or buzzing about a
room saying ‘hi’ to people. I get a rush from it! Sure, I’m still not
the most party-oriented person I know, but I no longer think we fit into
any neat introversion/extroversion buckets.

Growth mindset has become a kind of safe word for my partner and I.
Whenever we feel the other person getting defensive or refusing to try
something because “I’m not any good at it”, we say “Growth mindset!” and
try to approach the problem as a chance to grow, rather than a test of
our abilities. It’s no longer scary, it’s just another project to work
on.

Just like life itself.

**Next in this series:** [Look at yourself
objectively](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/semmelweis)

* * * * *

1.  Carol I. Diener and Carol S. Dweck, “[An Analysis of Learned
    Helplessness: Continuous Changes in Performance, Strategy, and
    Achievement Cognitions Following
    Failure](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.36.5.451),” *Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology*, **36**:5 (May 1978),
    451—462. [↩](#fnref:dweck78)

2.  Carol Dweck, *Mindset: The New Psychology of Success* (2007),
    3. [↩](#fnref:mindset1)

3.  Carol S. Dweck and Ellen L. Leggett, “[A Social-Cognitive Approach
    to Motivation and
    Personality](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256),”
    *Psychological Review*, **95**:2 (1988),
    256—273. [↩](#fnref:dweckleggett)

4.  Claudia M. Mueller and Carol Dweck, “[Praise for Intelligence Can
    Undermine Children’s Motivation and
    Performance](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.75.1.33),” *Journal
    of Personality and Social Psychology*, **75**:1 (July 1998),
    33–52. [↩](#fnref:muellerdweck)

5.  *Mindset*, 17. [↩](#fnref:m2)

6.  *Mindset*, 225. [↩](#fnref:m3)

7.  Carol Dweck, “[How can you change from a fixed mindset to a growth
    mindset?](http://mindsetonline.com/changeyourmindset/firststeps/index.html),”
    *mindsetonline.com* ([visited
    2012-08-18](http://www.webcitation.org/6A0ml0Csy)). [↩](#fnref:site)


