OCLC on the Run
===============

November 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/oclcreply)

* * * * *

OCLC is running scared. [My
comments](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/oclcscam) on their attempt to
monopolize library records has been Slashdotted, [our
petition](http://watchdog.net/c/stop-oclc) has received hundreds of
signatures, and they’re starting to feel the heat.

At a talk I gave this morning to area librarians, an OCLC rep stood up
and attempted to assure the crowd that what I was saying “wasn’t
entirely true”. “What wasn’t true?” I asked. “I’d love to correct
things.” She declined to say, insisting she “didn’t want to get into an
argument.”

This evening, OCLC’s Vice President for WorldCat and Metadata, provides
more details. In a blog comment (which, I understand, was sent to OCLC
members), she tries to downplay the issue, continuing the OCLC trend of
doublespeak about this serious change.

She tries to claim we’re on the same side (“We are likely in solid
agreement”) and insists they are just updating “the principles … which
have been in place since 1987” and absurdly claiming that the new rules
are just a “clarification”. (This is just one of a number of
black-is-white falsehoods in her post.)

But never once does she defend the actual changes. And they’re right
there in black-and-white: the records aren’t allowed to be used in
anything that “substantially replicates the function, purpose, and/or
size of WorldCat.” I’m not sure how much clearer they can get; these new
rules prohibit anyone from building anything that gets anywhere close to
WorldCat.

My fundamental point stands: As servers have gotten cheaper, it’s become
easy to do for free the things OCLC charges such outrageous amounts for.
But OCLC can’t have that — they’d have to give up their huge office
complex and high salaries (Ms. Calhoun was recently hired away from
academia, so her salary isn’t available yet, but her fellow VPs make
around \$300,000/year). So they’re trying to stamp out the competition.

Karen insists that “OCLC welcomes collaboration with Open Library”,
which seems a funny way of putting it. As I said last time, they’ve
played hardball: trying to cut off our funding, hurt our reputation, and
pressured libraries not to cooperate. When we tried to make a deal with
them, they dragged their feet for months, pretended to come to terms,
and then had their lawyers send us an “agreement” to sign that would
require we take all OCLC-related records off our site.

Karen, if you really want to “increas[e] information access to users
around the globe”, like you say, here’s an easy first step: put the 2
million WorldCat web pages you shared with Google and Yahoo up for
download on your website. It’s only a small portion of your catalog and
you’ve already shared it with others. Until you take even a baby step
like that, it’s hard to take your protestations of good intent
seriously.
