Cass Sunstein, Concern Troll
============================

January 16, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/casskills)

* * * * *

[[cross-posted to Open
Left](http://www.openleft.com/showDiary.do?diaryId=10955)]

Remember when President Bush tried to put more arsenic in our drinking
water? Lots of people got outraged — it seemed like a classic example of
a deregulator-in-chief helping his corporate friends at our expense. Not
Cass Sunstein, a prominent (and nominally-liberal) law professor.

Sunstein, working for and with right-wing deregulatory think tanks,
published a piece called “The Arithmetic of Arsenic”, arguing that
everyone needs to stop being so *emotional* about these things. We can’t
decide whether arsenic should be in our water based on fuzzy-wuzzy
arguments about not killing people. No, we need to be hard-headed
realists and decide exactly how much a human life is worth and whether
filtering arsenic is worth the cost. In short, we have to do
*cost-benefit analysis*.

As fellow law prof Tom McGarity pointed out, Sunstein continued to hold
this view despite the fact that Sunstein’s own research into the subject
showed that there was so much uncertainty around the issue that just
using different previously-published estimates could result in whatever
conclusion you like. And there was no obvious way to decide which
estimate to trust.

All of this would be just another story in the annals of out-of-touch
intellectuals — a law professor who gets off on killing people to save
money, actual facts be damned — except for one frightening fact: Barack
Obama just put this law professor in charge of cost-benefit analysis for
the whole government.

The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) was set up by
Ronald Reagan to allow him veto power over any federal regulation. If
the EPA wanted to stop companies from poisoning fish, if the DOJ wanted
to stop businesses from discriminating, if OSHA wanted to protect
miners’ lungs, OIRA could intervene and double-check their cost-benefit
analysis. They could rejigger the numbers to make it so that the
regulation got killed or if they failed at that they could just demand
more and more research from the agency, delaying the regulation it was
finally abandoned.

OIRA was one of Reagan’s most powerful tools for keeping the Federal
Government from doing its job. And now someone who’s a strong fan of its
mission has been put in charge. It’s a scary thought, especially as
you’re going to get a glass of drinking water.
