The Political Philosophy of Toy Story 3
=======================================

June 20, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toystory3pol)

* * * * *

[**SPOILER WARNING:** This is pretty much all spoilers, so please seem
the movie before reading. It’s a really, really good movie — probably
the best Disney film. So you should totally see it. First.]

**UPDATE:** I missed a bunch the first time I saw the movie; this
version has been amended to include the subthemes about immigration and
socialization.

The film begins with Woody trying to defend a crumbling system of
communism (presumably the Soviet Union). Toys have a duty to their
owners, he argues. The owner is a personified totalitarian state
(Stalin?) — he decides what the toys do and the toys are not permitted
to escape. For some reason (false consciousness?), the other toys
instinctively agree with this but find the notion hard to sustain when
their owner makes clear he doesn’t want them anymore (massive
unemployment).

The last straw is when, through a comic mishap, they get the
misimpression their owner is trying to throw them away. They feel this
existential threat releases them from their duty of
loyalty.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ The state’s one duty to its citizens is to keep
them alive; if it can’t do that, the system falls apart. Note, however,
that it’s only the misimpression that removes the duty. When they learn
(from Mrs. Potato Head) that they were mistaken and Andy only planned to
put them in the attic, they rush to return to him. The attic won’t
actually kill them and so doesn’t remove the duty.

Communism having collapsed, the toys emigrate to Sunnyside (the US, that
nation of immigrants), which leader Lotso depicts as a libertarian
paradise. In his introductory he speech, he touts the joys of
self-ownership and interacting with children through the market (new
children are constantly replacing old ones, maximizing the efficiency of
the toys), as well as the improved material comforts his system brings
(the repair depot, the dream house). The toys are enchanted.

However, they quickly realize libertarian paradise is actually a far
worse nightmare than communism. Lotso explains that immigrants have to
work their way up, starting by doing the painful, backbreaking jobs that
the current population (all former immigrants themselves) won’t do.
There are a couple exceptions: Barbie is taken as a (Russian) mail-order
bride and the entrepreneurial Buzz is chosen for promotion to the
managerial class and resocialized so he won’t sympathize with his old
comrades.^[2](#fn:fni)^

Sunnside’s supposed freedom is actually slavery, complete with military
discipline (via the reset Buzz) and a panopticon prison (via the monkey
and symbolized by the treehouse). Their days are spent in torturous
labor from which there is no real escape. Lotso has used his freedom to
accumulate all the power for himself and does not allow any for anyone
else.

Meanwhile, Woody is adopted by Bonnie’s benevolent dictatorship. People
are given a second chance there — they can adopt new names, new
identities, and spend their days doing improv. They do work under
Bonnie’s direction, but they do so voluntarily, and are free to leave if
she becomes a tyrant. As Andy makes clear at the end of the film, it is
Bonnie who owes a duty to the toys, not vice versa.

Back at Sunnyside, the toys overthrow Lotso’s capitalist domination by
working together, harnessing the collective power of the working class
and using the managerial class (i.e. Ken and Bookworm) against itself
(via deception and torture!). But their success eventually persuades
some members of the managerial class to become their allies (e.g. Ken,
despite having been tortured^[3](#fn:fn3)^, and ultimately Lotso’s
right-hand toy, Big Baby) and at a key moment they together overthrow
the capitalist Lotso, as Barbie gives a rousing speech nailing the key
flaw with libertarianism: “authority should derive from the consent of
the governed, not the threat of force.”

However, the new revolutionaries also leave, preventing them from
installing themselves as a new dictatorship of the proletariat. And in a
final act betraying that he is finally beginning to question communism,
Woody asks Andy (surely his first request of the state in his entire
life!) that his comrades be given to Bonnie. Andy agrees, and takes the
extra step of giving Woody to Bonnie as well, finally dissolving his
duties to the state.

Meanwhile, Ken and Barbie now lead Sunnyside, making it a “fun and
groovy” socialist utopia. (Its actual day-to-day operation is, of
course, left vague, but there is apparently lots of dancing in the
streets.) Having risen up and overthrown Lotso, the toys can now operate
on the basis of mutual equality. A happy ending for everyone.

* * * * *

1.  The same seems to apply to the Green Army Men who leave earlier, but
    only because they (pretty reasonably) believe they’re going to get
    thrown away even when other toys just go to the
    attic. [↩](#fnref:fn1)

2.  Very *Street Corner Society*, so another possible reading is that
    they’re fleeing fascist Italy. [↩](#fnref:fni)

3.  Perhaps Ken realizes that he will get to lead a Lotso-less
    Sunnsyside? [↩](#fnref:fn3)


