Life in a World of Pervasive Immorality: The Ethics of Being Alive
==================================================================

August 2, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/immoral)

* * * * *

I used to think I was a pretty good person. I certainly didn’t kill
people, for example. But then Peter Singer pointed out that animals were
conscious and that eating them led them to be killed and that wasn’t all
that morally different from killing people after all. So I became a
vegetarian.

Again I thought I was a pretty good person. But then Arianna Huffington
told me that by driving in a car I was pouring toxic fumes into the air
and sending money to foreign dictatorships. So I got a bike instead.

But then I realized that my bike seat was sewn by children in foreign
sweatshops while its tubing was made by mining metals through ripping up
the earth. Indeed, any money I spent was likely to go to oppressing
people or destroying the planet in one way or another. And if I happen
to make money some of it goes to the government which spends it blowing
people up in Afghanistan or Iraq.

I thought about just living off of stuff I found in dumpsters, like some
friends. That way I wouldn’t be responsible for encouraging its
production. But then I realized that some people buy the things they
can’t find in dumpsters; if I got to the dumpster and took something
before they did, they might buy it instead.

The solution seemed clear: I’d have to go off-the-grid and live in a
cave, gathering nuts and berries. I’d still probably be exhaling CO2 and
using some of the products in the Earth, but probably only in levels
that were sustainable.

Perhaps you disagree with me that it’s morally wrong to kill animals or
blow up people in Afghanistan. But surely you can imagine that it
*might* be, or at least that someone could think it is. And I think it’s
similarly clear that eating a hamburger or paying taxes contributes — in
a very small way; perhaps only has the possibility of contributing — to
those things.

Even if you don’t, everyday life has a million ways that are more
direct. Personally, I think it’s wrong that I get to sit at a table and
gaily devour while someone else delivers more food to my table and a
third person slaves over a stove. Every time I order food, I make them
do more carrying and slaving. (Perhaps they get some money in return,
but surely they’d prefer it if I just gave them the money.) Again, you
may not think this wrong but I hope you can admit the possibility. And
it’s obviously my fault.

Off in the cave, I thought I was safe. But then I read [Peter Singer’s
latest book](http://www.thelifeyoucansave.com/). He points out that for
as little as a quarter, you can save a child’s life. (E.g. for 27 cents
you can buy the oral rehydration salts that will save a child from fatal
diarrhea.) Perhaps I was killing people after all.

I couldn’t morally make money, for the reasons described above.
(Although maybe it’s worth helping fund the bombing of children in
Afghanistan in order to help save children in Mozambique.) But instead
of living in a cave, I could go to Africa and volunteer my time.

Of course, if I do that there are a thousand other things I’m not doing.
How can I decide which action I take will save the most lives? Even if I
take the time to figuring out, that’s time I’m spending on myself
instead of saving lives.

It seems impossible to be moral. Not only does everything I do cause
great harm, but so does everything I don’t do. Standard accounts of
morality assume that it’s difficult, but attainable: don’t lie, don’t
cheat, don’t steal. But it seems like living a moral life isn’t even
possible.

But if morality is unattainable, surely I should simply do the best I
can. (Ought implies can, after all.) Peter Singer is a good utilitarian,
so perhaps I should try to maximize the good I do for the world. But
even this seems like an incredibly onerous standard. I should not just
stop eating meat, but animal products altogether. I shouldn’t just stop
buying factory-farmed food, I should stop buying altogether. I should
take things out of dumpsters other people are unlikely to be searching.
I should live someplace where others won’t be disturbed.

Of course all this worrying and stress is preventing me from doing any
good in the world. I can hardly take a step without thinking about who
it hurts. So I decide not to worry about the bad I might be doing and
just focus on doing good — screw the rules.

But this doesn’t just apply to the rules inspired by Peter Singer.
Waiting in line at the checkout counter is keeping me from my
life-saving work (and paying will cost me life-saving money) — better
just to shoplift. Lying, cheating, any crime can be similarly justified.

It seems paradoxical: in my quest to do good I’ve justified doing all
sorts of bad. Nobody questioned me when I went out and ordered a juicy
steak, but when I shoplift soda everyone recoils. Is there sense in
following their rules or are they just another example of the world’s
pervasive immorality? Have any philosophers considered this question?
