A Theory of Change
==================

September 10, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toc)

* * * * *

People want to make the world a better place. But how? Barack Obama says
I can change the direction of the country by voting for him. Al Gore
says I can solve the climate crisis with a letter to the editor. MoveOn
says I can stop George W. Bush by signing their petition. Perhaps, but
these requests ring hollow. How is writing a letter to my local paper
going to stop the polar ice caps from melting?

Most groups have a couple steps at the end (switch to alternative
energy, stopping carbon from being emitted, preventing global warming)
and a couple steps at the beginning (write your congressman and send a
letter to the paper) but in between they seem to expect that some kind
of miracle will happen. They’re missing the concrete steps in between,
the actual way we get from here to there.

In the nonprofit world, such a plan is called a Theory of Change. And
the reason they’re so rare is because they’re dreadfully hard to come
by. The world has no shortage of big problems, but it’s hard to think of
ways we might realistically solve them. Instead, the same few things —
vote, preach, march — get trotted out again and again.

For over a year now, I’ve been looking for theories of change for
politics. And I’ve found a few that I think just might work. But I can’t
pull them off by myself. So here they are, in case someone out there
wants to help.

The Netroots Congress
---------------------

Here’s how you get elected to Congress today: First, you make friends
with a bunch of wealthy people, being sure to agree with them on all the
important issues. Then you take their money and hire a well-connected
Washington, D.C. campaign manager. The campaign manager shows you how to
ask for more money and then gives it to his partner, who makes some TV
and radio ads and runs them in your district. They keep doing this until
your money runs out and then, if you’re lucky, you get more votes than
the other guy.

Because of the netroots, it’s now possible to change the first part of
this story. Instead of raising your money from conservative or centrist
rich people, you can now raise money from progressive people over the
Internet. So instead of candidates who all agree that telephone
companies shouldn’t be punished for spying on Americans, you can have
candidates who think every American should have free health care.

Concretely, you’d ask people who want to do this to sign up to pay \$X a
month. Then you’d go around looking for candidates (or potential
candidates) who genuinely believe in progressive principles. When you
find them, you give them the money, and now they actually have a chance
of getting elected.

Bonus: Get more money by fiercely promoting how bad the incumbent is or
how good the challenger is.

This sort of thing has been done haphazardly and achieved some real
successes. Donna Edwards, for example, is now a member of Congress. The
idea here is to institutionalize it.

The Plain-Speaking Party
------------------------

The last plan changes the first part of the election process I
mentioned. But you could also try changing the rest of it. Right now, if
you want to run as a Democrat, your biggest source of funding will be
the Democratic Party, especially the Democratic Congressional Campaign
Committee (DCCC). To get their money, the DCCC
[requires](http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2005/0501.sullivan.html)
you hire one of their friends. Their friends are all corrupt hacks who
run the same failed campaigns again and again.

This is normally thought to be unavoidable because you can’t win without
money and you can’t get money without the DCCC. What this misses is that
you don’t need as much money if you’re running a radically innovative
campaign.

Instead of raising money to run ads, do a PR stunt that will get lots of
free media and word-of-mouth attention. Center your campaign around a
clear proposal that most of the public will support but no other
politician would dare touch. Be forceful and refuse to back down in the
face of attacks from the press or your opponent. And, above all, always
make it clear to people that you’re an average person, not an average
politician. No boring speeches, no political buzzwords, no meaningless
cliches.

It’s never been seriously tried outside of the movies, but I expect that
the effect would be electrifying. The media would cover your every
entertaining move and money would flow in from around the Internet. The
60% that doesn’t vote in midterms would start to reconsider. Hell, Ron
Paul attempted half this strategy while being completely nuts and he
still received enough money and volunteers to win five House seats.

If you can actually win an election this way, you’ll be able to get
dozens more to follow your lead the next time around. Pretty soon, it’ll
be a movement.

Slate Cards
-----------

It’s not just about the President and it’s not just about Congress.
(It’s also not just about the US, but that’s what we’re focusing on
today.) Local elections also have an impact, if only the people who win
them often go on to even bigger positions. (Who in Wassila, Alaska
thought they might be picking a future president?)

Most local races don’t get a lot of attention and most people don’t do
much research on them. Which makes them much easier to influence that
bigger races. Imagine a site where you gave it your email address and
zip code and every time there was a local election, it’d send you the
progressive candidates to vote for. You could print it out and take it
to the polls and feel much better about your pick for “register of
probate”.

In San Francisco, the local papers issue endorsements on all the races
and each of the candidates they endorse chip in some money to send a
postcard with the whole endorsement list to every voter. This group
could do the same thing. It could also ask folks to chip in a couple
bucks to help pay for mailing post cards to their neighbors. (Or they
could print some out at home.)

Shareholder Democracy
---------------------

Supposedly, corporations aren’t actually controlled by their CEOs. The
CEOs are instead hired by the shareholders, to run the business that the
shareholders actually own. A lot of these shares are held by people who
aren’t big fans of business as usual. If they got together they could
use their shares to vote for reform.

Now voting on shares is complicated enough that most people don’t
bother, but increasingly votes are being moved onto the Internet. It’s
possible for an aspiring organization to build some software that could
automatically vote for people if they wanted. So you could imagine, for
example, a couple million MoveOn members letting a new progressive group
vote their shares for them, allowing progressives to apply some real
pressure to misbehaving corporations.

Combined with legal changes that are being considered that would further
make corporate voting more fair, this is something that could make a
real impact.

Seriously Interesting Journalism
--------------------------------

[I’ve written about this
before.](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/deadnews) The basic idea is
simple: There’s lots of fascinating stuff going on in the world. And
yet, to become news, all the background and color is drained out of it.
Worse, to be on TV, a story has to be so dumbed down that you feel
stupid for watching it. And to be in the paper, a story has to have so
little background that only an expert could understand it. A news show
that covered interesting stories in a way that made them genuinely
interesting would be quite popular and could have a tremendous impact.

More?
-----

I’ll try to remember to update this page as I learn more. Post your own
ideas in the comments. (Remember: “Require all politicians to wear a lie
detector” is not a theory of change — we’re looking for ways to get
there.)
