Wassup?
=======

March 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wassup)

* * * * *

Wow, it’s been a long time since we last talked. In fairness, I’ve been
hard at work. As you probably know, for a long time I’ve been working on
a startup called [infogami](http://infogami.com/). If you’re interested
in the full story, [I’ve written a long blog post about
it](http://infogami.com/blog/introduction) but in short, last November I
joined the amazing team behind [reddit](http://reddit.com/), merging our
two companies.

Then, about a month ago, I quietly released the first version of
[infogami](http://infogami.com/) to the public. It was a very early
version with hardly any features and I didn’t tell anyone about it, but
we still got several thousand sites created using the software.

Since then, I’ve kept my promise of releasing a new feature every day,
steadily improving the site bit by bit. There are a couple things I’m
particularly proud of, including our advanced permissions system which
gives detailed control over exactly who can do what with your site and
[the blame feature](http://infogami.com/blog/blame) that was put
together by my friends Zack Coburn and Sean B. Palmer which shows
exactly who wrote what in a document. And of course there’s much more to
come.

Of course, working on just one project all the time is a little much, so
I’ve been taking little breaks to work on new hacks. This weekend I
built a little site called (for now, at least) [Simple
Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/). I was annoyed with how slow it was
to search Amazon — first you have to load their complicated front page,
type in your search in the tiny hidden box, then click the link to
filter it just for books and so on. With Simple Amazon, you just go to a
URL like:

[http://books.theinfo.org/lisp](http://books.theinfo.org/lisp)

and you get a listing of lisp books superfast with covers and links to
price checks. You can also use links like:

[http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262011530](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0262011530)

to provide shorter links to Amazon.

Anyway, I guess that’s about it for now. If you’re interested in
following my more day-to-day work, I’m publishing company-related stuff
over on the [infogami blog](http://infogami.com/blog/). Currently it’s
mostly just reports about our new features, but I hope to write more
about the startup life and things like that.

All the best!
