Aaron’s Patented Demotivational Seminar
=======================================

March 27, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/demotivate)

* * * * *

Thousands of people out there are willing to give you a motivational
seminar, but only Aaron’s Patented Demotivational Seminars are going to
actually admit they demotivate you. I’ve collected thousands of actual
facts from real scientists and the verdict is in: people don’t matter,
except for a couple of rare exceptions, and you’re not one of them.
Sorry.

Let’s start at the beginning, shall we? The universe is a bunch of
random particles shooting through space following a handful of simple
laws. Through completely random and unintentional properties, some of
those particles bounced together to form you. But, I swear, it was a
total accident. They didn’t even realize they were doing it at the time
and if they knew they’d probably feel kind of guilty about it.

For a long time, it was pretty clear that most people didn’t matter. The
average person didn’t leave their town or village and so only interacted
with a small handful of people who lived near them, most of whom found
them annoying. The Internet has changed all that. Now the average person
doesn’t leave their computer and so only interacts with a small handful
of spammers who read their LiveJournal, most of whom find them annoying.
Luckily for posterity, their LiveJournal will probably disappear within
their lifetime due to a hard drive crash or some other kind of poor
server maintenance.

But let’s say you want to make a difference in the world. You can learn
a skill and go into a profession, where you get bossed around and told
exactly what to do by people more powerful than you. (Obeying them is
called “professionalism”.) It’s completely futile; had you not gone into
the professional (or if you decide to disobey orders) they would have
found someone else to do the exact same thing.

The same is true even if you’re the one giving orders. Imagine about the
most powerful job you can think of. Let’s say you’re a US Supreme Court
Justice, able to change the laws of the world’s only superpower with the
stroke of your pen. Well, big deal. Had you not been appointed to the
Supreme Court the President who appointed you would have found some
other judge who would have made the same changes to the law. Yeah, you
get to wear a robe and feel powerful, but when you look at the cold,
hard, scientific facts, you’re not making a lick of difference in the
world.

Want to actually make a difference? You’ll have to buck the system
instead of joining it.
