Free Speech: Because We Can
===========================

November 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/becausewecan)

* * * * *

In the field of Constitutional Law, there are many pages spent trying to
come up with a reason for free speech. It’s about the “marketplace of
ideas” some say: by putting all claims and points of view out in the
open, the public can sort through and figure out the truth, leaving the
untruths to fall by the wayside. Others argue that free speech is
necessary for democracy, since voters must hear different opinions to
decide how to use their votes, and that since even non-political speech
can change people’s views, all speech must then be protected.

There are many more justifications like this — a limit on government
abuse, a policy to promote a more tolerant citizenship, etc. — but, like
most justifications, they all say we should permit free speech because
it allows us to do something else. And the frustrating thing about that
is that it suggests that free speech should not be permitted when it
doesn’t achieve those goals.

Theorists of free speech are, in general, fans of the idea (or at least
their market consists of fans) so they try to dance around this. “Oh
no,” the marketplace-of-ideas partisans say, “we weren’t suggesting that
obviously false statements could be prohibited because, after all, you
really never know when false statements could turn out to be true!”

But, as [something of a free speech
absolutist](http://bits.are.notabug.com/), it troubles me that such a
thing is even theoretically possible. And I worry that if others adopt
this theory, they may not be so stringent about the practical
requirements. The temptation to clamp down on free speech is always
strong; it’s probably not a sound idea to build the principle on such a
shaky foundation.

So I have my own justification for freedom of speech: because we can.
Human freedom is important, so we should try to protect it from
encroachment wherever possible. With most freedoms — freedom of motion,
freedom of exchange, freedom of action — permitting them in full would
cause some problems. People shouldn’t be free to walk into other
people’s bedrooms, take all their stuff, and then punch the poor victims
in the face. But hurling a bunch of epithets at the guy really isn’t so
bad.

Freedom of speech is one place where we can draw the line and say: all
of this is acceptable. There’s no further logic to it than that; freedom
of speech is not an *instrumental* value. Like all freedom, it’s
fundamental, and the only reason we happen to single it out is because
it’s more reasonable than all of the others.

Close readers will note that this theory doesn’t quite live up to my own
goals. By laying freedom of speech’s provision on top of our reasonable
ability to do so, I suggest that freedom of speech could be taken away
if providing it became unreasonable. But I think this is the right
choice: if people really, seriously started getting hurt because of
freedom of speech, it seems right for people to take the privilege away.
But, to be honest, I can’t even imagine how that might be possible.
Words just don’t genuinely wound, they’re always mediated by our
listening.

I do worry that people might try to stretch this justification — say
that continued free speech might destroy the war effort, or the
government, or civil society. But I have no problem destroying all of
those. It’s only the destruction of actual people that I worry about.

So here’s to free speech: because we can.
