San Francisco
=============

February 3, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sanfrancisco)

* * * * *

“So I find myself back in California,” sings Quasi. And so I do. I spend
half my life trying to get here, I spend the rest trying to get away.
But here I finally am, and perhaps it’s time to simply give in.

California is large; it contains multitudes. Locals claim the peninsula
is so big and irregular that it even contains microclimates — areas with
different weather patterns. There is the glorious hill of Alamo Square,
near the apartment I stay in, from which you can see the houses featured
in the opening credits of *Full House* and watch the city stretch out
below you. As you cross the street to head to the park, if you turn your
head in the middle to watch for cars, you see a glorious road roll
downwards, ending at a monumental city hall building, a glowing golden
dome.

Or if you climb Twin Peaks, the hill overlooking Noe Valley, one night,
the streetlights make the buildings below look like cardboard backdrops
and a rolling grid of points of light sweeps out behind it, hills
culminating in the tall buildings that make up the San Francisco
skyline.

Or there’s Valencia street, the oddball mix of pirate supply shops,
burger joints, bike stores, hipster coffee houses and breakfast places,
alongside restaurants of every ethnicity.

And, of course, the city is filled with brilliant and fun people.
Marxist sex columnists, investigative technology reporters,
self-experimenting tenured professors, crimefighting lawyers, activist
technologists, startup founders, hackers, hipsters. I could hang out
with these people forever.

Then one morning I awoke to find three of my favorite people inviting me
to find a brilliant new place in the city and be their roommate. It’s a
hard offer to resist, no matter the city. It’s the day before I leave
for my Christmas trip to Europe and I promise myself that before I go
I’ll see the Sunset. I finish up all my work tasks and run as fast as I
can to catch the streetcar that winds its way through the city, past
pastel houses on rolling hills, past video stores and laundromats, past
cafes and bakeries, past offices and parks.

And then we hit the end of the peninsula, a road and then a hill and
then a beach. And there it is, [just like in
LA](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/visitingla), the sun setting right
before me, casting a glow over the beach. And the fog is rolling of the
hills in the nice lines that you thought only existed in heavily
photoshopped pictures and you watch the waves on the beach roll up to
your feet and the beauty overtakes you and you fall back against the
hill and there’s really only one thing you can say, even if it’s to no
one but yourself:

“Alright, San Francisco. I concede. You win.”
