Why You Shop At Wal-Mart: Economics Eats Itself
===============================================

March 13, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nobodyshops)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_nobodyshops)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/189707106X)

There is a theory (quite an elegant one, actually) that says that
because we live in a marketplace of free choices we end up getting
basically what we want — our dollars are like votes for the society we
wish to live in. Many have challenged this view, from a variety of
perspectives, but Tom Slee (who calls this notion MarketThink) has
chosen to focus on just one: the economic subfield of “game theory”.

In his elegant little book, the poorly-titled *No One Makes You Shop At
Wal-Mart*, Slee walks through the major discoveries of game theory,
explains them in simple language with reference to a fictional town of
Whimsley, and discusses how they refute standard economic conclusions
while still playing by basic economic assumptions with effects that
appear to show up in the real world.

Take the problem of littering, for example. The town of Whimsley has a
large park between its coffee shop and its office building. Residents
can toss their empty coffee cups on the ground in the park, thereby
saving themselves the trouble of carrying it but minutely spoiling the
park, or they can carry it to the trash at the office, saving the park
but bothering their hands. In the absence of anyone else, each resident
is better off tossing their cup — the bother of carrying it is much more
than the small amount of spoilage. But if everyone does this, the park
is quickly full of litter. Each individual, acting perfectly rationally,
creates a situation that none of them want.

A similar problem gives the book its title. Imagine you get some utility
from having a vibrant downtown of independent shops. Then a Wal-Mart
opens up on the outskirts of town. You begin shopping at the Wal-Mart
because the prices are cheaper and you can still walk through the
vibrant downtown when you like. But with everyone buying things at
Wal-Mart, the downtown stores can no longer afford to stay open and the
center of your city turns into an empty husk. You’d prefer to have the
vibrant downtown to the Wal-Mart, but nobody ever gave you that choice.

The book is full of dozens of examples like this, each with careful
analysis and clear writing. Perhaps the most odd feature of the book is
its politics. On the one hand, Slee is plainly a committed leftist, with
positive references to Naomi Klein and other capitalist critics. But on
the other hand, he never gives up on the rational actor and
methodological individualist assumptions of modern economics, and shows
little patience for those (typically his political allies) who have more
thorough-going critiques. Nonetheless, the book is a recommended read
for anyone interested in these questions.

**Online Bonus:** Watch Tom Slee [eviscerate Chris Anderson’s
inbox-stuffer, *The Long
Tail*](http://whimsley.typepad.com/whimsley/2007/03/the_long_tail_l.html)
on his weblog, Whimsley. Because, remember folks, “Abundance, like
growth itself, is a force that is changing our world in ways that we
experience every day, whether we have an equation to describe it or
not.” (p. 146)

[image1_nobodyshops]: image1_nobodyshops.jpg