Discrimination and Causation
============================

May 23, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/discrimcause)

* * * * *

**First,** let’s imagine that tomorrow scientists announced the
discovery of rock-solid, unimpeachable, 100% convincing evidence of
differences in mental function between men and women. Let’s say, for
example, they notice that there’s a tiny hole where the “math center” of
the brain should be. No wonder they do worse at math!

No doubt, *The Times* would respond with [a handwringing
article](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/003894.html)
about the important scientific implications and David Brooks would
[throw a
party](http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/003246.html)
and denounce closed-minded liberals. George Bush would cancel programs
aimed at helping girls learn math and Harvard University would shut down
their task force on getting women tenure.

But are these really appropriate responses? Showing genetic differences
is only the first in a long line of things that need to be shown to
prove that gender-based disparities in tenure are unavoidable. [As
Jeremy
Freese](http://jeremyfreese.blogspot.com/2006/11/twenty-four-stories-of-internal.html)
has pointed out, it’s a long line from genes to social outcomes. To make
the case, you need to go a lot further.

**Second,** you have to show the genetic differences are relevant. It’s
possible the hole in the math center could be completely insignificant,
that women do just as well at math irrespective. So you need to show
that the hole *causes* differences in functioning. One way to do this is
to find different people with differing sizes of holes, control for as
many other factors as possible, and see if the size of hole is
correlated with some test of math functioning.

**Third,** you need to prove that the differences are unavoidable. The
brain has amazing levels of neuroplasticity. Perhaps with the right
environment, women can be taught to do math with another part of their
brain. Perhaps, as a result, they might even do *better* than men at
math. Again, [Freese has pointed
out](http://jeremyfreese.blogspot.com/2006/11/eight-plots-revised.html)
that the same genetic differences (or genetic similarities) can go all
sorts of different places in different environments. If there’s an easy
environmental change that makes even genetically different women equally
good at math, we ought to make it.

**Fourth,** you need to show a causal link from the genetic difference
to the tenure disparity. Why is it that doing worse at math causes you
to do worse at tenure? Are speed-math-tests used as a relevant factor in
tenure decisions? If so, maybe you guys should really cut that out,
because that’s a pretty stupid test.

**Fifth,** you need to show that it’s the only cause of discrimination.
Even if genetic differences cause some of the disparity, it’s still
morally required for us to remove the rest. Do guys with holes in their
math center do just as bad as women at getting tenure? Do women with no
holes do just as well as men?

Right now, there’s only even arguable evidence for the very first of
these. Those of us who want to shove discrimination under the rug need
to do a lot more work on the other four.
