The Forgotten Sidekick
======================

December 11, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/forgottensidekick)

* * * * *

It’s been a frustrating year for us Sidekick users. It seems like every
television show, periodical, and man in the street is raving about the
amazing world-changing capabilities of the iPhone (and, to a lesser
extent, the Google Phone). How having a device that can conveniently
surf the Web, answer email, run third-party applications and fit in your
pocket is [as big a technological breakthrough as
hovercars](http://daringfireball.net/2008/10/iphone_3g).

Which is infuriating to those of us who have been using a superior
device for the past five years.

From the very first demo of the iPhone, it was obvious it was a knockoff
of the Sidekick. The UI demo Steve Jobs did — calling two people and
then merging the calls — is the exact same demo I’d given to all my
friends to show off the incredible UI polish and attention to detail by
the Sidekick developers. Sure, there were some differences — most
notably that Apple’s artists had prettied up the iPhone UI as compared
to the 8-bit basement wackos who drew up the Sidekick’s — but it was
clear that this was an evolutionary change, not the revolutionary leap
everyone made it out to be.

And, when I bought an iPhone, it became clear it wasn’t even an
improvement. The touch-keyboard made it impossible to type anything at
length (I regularly composed whole articles on my Sidekick), the lack of
multitasking made it impossible to queue up articles in the Web browser
and read them on the subway (I read several books on the Sidekick),
instant messages weren’t even supported, and the swipe-to-scroll method
quickly grew tiresome. Within a couple weeks, I sold the phone to a
friend (although not before getting an outrageous roaming bill from AT&T
because the iPhone couldn’t keep its mouth shut).

For those two weeks, though, I was repeatedly stopped and gawked at by
well-dressed people in airports and trains. They all wanted to know “Is
that the iPhone?” and “How is it?” By contrast, those people, when they
saw me using the Sidekick, assumed it was a videogame device.

But it wasn’t as if the Sidekick was unheard of. As soon as I wandered
out of the land of white folks in suits-and-ties, black and latino kids
would rush up to me and gab about the Sidekick. During one trip, a
latina middle-schooler stopped me on the sidewalk and asked if I’d
gotten the latest firmware update yet. “It has JavaScript support!” she
enthused. Browsing the Sidekick user forums bore this out — it was all
black and latino schoolchildren.

But, of course, neither minorities nor schoolchildren rule the world, so
the Sidekick has been written out of history. 2007 was the first time
anyone had thought to give a smartphone a decent UI, or a web browser,
or an over-the-air application store. Well, at least it was the first
time anyone thought to tell white people.
