---
layout: post
title:  "The God Who Wasn’t There (And The One Who Was)"
date:   2005/06/01 00:00
---

Original: [The God Who Wasn’t There (And The One Who Was)](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/thegodmovie)

----------

<!--
“I was doing some research into the idea that Jesus never existed. When
I first looked into it, I thought it was just a crackpot theory and I
was curious why anyone would believe this,” explains Brian Flemming. “To
my surprise I found the evidence kept stacking up. The more I looked
into it, the more that the facts aligned with those who said Jesus was
just a legendary character. The shaky evidence and the poor reasoning
were actually on the side of those who said that Jesus did exist.”
-->
｢イエス・キリストなんて人は存在しなかった、という思いつきについて、調べ物をしていたんだ。はじめは、的外れな話で誰も信じやしないと思っていた。｣映画監督Brian Flemmingはこう続けた。｢ところが、意外にもその思いつきを裏付ける証拠がどんどん出てきてさ。調べれば調べるほど、イエス・キリストなんて空想の産物に過ぎないとする証拠が出てきた。実際のところ怪しい証拠や胡散臭い理屈を振りかざしていたのは、イエス・キリストが存在したと主張してきた人たちだったんだ｣

<!--
And so Flemming (*Bat Boy: The Musical*, *Nothing So Strange*, *Fair &
Balanced*, and all-around digital rights supporter) decided to make a
movie. The result, which is currently being screened across the country
in theaters and at atheist organizations and will be released on DVD
soon, is a shockingly good film.
-->
そこでFlemming(ミュージカル*Bat Boy: The Musical*、映画*Nothing So Strange*の監督であり、書籍*Fair & Balanced*の著者。また、オープンソース活動家でもある)は、このテーマに基づいた映画を撮ることにした。出来上がったもの(いまアメリカ中の映画館などで上映されてる)は、衝撃的なくらい良い映画だった。

<!--
Flemming begins at the beginning: the popular story of Jesus. In a
hilarious montage of old footage taken from the Prelinger archives
underneath deadpan narration, he tells the story in six minutes. And
then it’s on to debunking it. Through interviews with various experts,
illustrated with entertaining graphics, he tries to reconstruct the
historical evidence for the story…only to find there isn’t much and a
lot doesn’t add up.
-->
映画では、Flemmingはまずイエス・キリストにまつわる有名な逸話に触れる。Prelinger archivesから取ってきたのだろう古い映像を面白おかしく組み合わせ、抑揚のないナレーションで、ざっと６分くらいでその逸話を紹介。続いてそれの嘘を次々と暴いていく。専門家へのインタビュー、目を引く図や絵を用い、彼はその逸話を成立させるべく史実を組み上げていくのだが、結局、史実なんてものはあまりなくて、大した証拠にはならないことが判明する。

<!--
Convinced the story is wrong, Flemming takes aim at the right-wing
Christian fundamentalists who act based on it, the wishy-washy Christian
moderates who enable them, and the rest of the system. He concludes by
heading back home to the fundamentalist Christian school he attended as
a child to confront the principal about what he’s teaching children.
-->
イエス・キリストにまつわる逸話が誤りであることに確信を得たFlemmingは、続いて、その逸話に基いて活動する右翼のキリスト教原理主義者、彼らを支援する日和見なキリスト教穏健派などに的を絞っていく。結論を出すべく、Flemmingは彼が子どもの頃通ったキリスト教原理主義系の学校に出向き、同校の校長と授業内容について議論を交わすことに...

<!--
Flemming’s previous film, *Nothing So Strange* ([which I also
reviewed](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001102)) was interesting but, in
fairness, rather amateurish. No such criticism can be made of this film,
which has some of the best graphics I’ve seen in a documentary and a
brilliant score composed from the Creative Commons-licensed Wired CD by
the hertofore-unknown DJ Madson (a nom-de-plume of Flemming, I’m
beginning to suspect) by remixing popular artists. The whole thing, from
the interviews down to the promotional posters, hangs together so well
that it’s hard to believe Flemming is doing this all himself, but
apparently he is, with no liberal atheist conspiracy to back him.
-->
Flemmingの前作である *Nothing So Strange* ([当時書いたレビュー](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001102))は面白かったけど、控えめに言っても素人くさい感じだった。けど、今作は大違い。これまで見てきたドキュメンタリーのなかでも絵は最上級だったし、無名の DJ Madson (Flemming の音楽活動用の偽名だと思ってるんだけど。)が人気のアーティストたちをリミックスした Wired という CD (クリエイティブ・コモンズでライセンスされてる)から採られた音楽もとてもよかった。インタビューに始まって宣伝用のパスタ～に至るまで、もう全てがよくまとまっていて、リベラルな無神論者たちの支援もなしに、Flemming が全部一人でやってるとは信じられないくらい。

<!--
(Although, in full disclosure, Larry Lessig and former Creative Commons
executive director Glenn Otis Brown receive special thanks in the
credits. And in a remote Q&A via iChat after the screening here at
Stanford, Flemming was wearing a Creative Commons shirt. So if you want
to investigate a conspiracy, that’s where I’d look.)
-->
(とはいえ、隠さずに言うと、Larry Lessig と Glenn Otis Brown(クリエイティブ・コモンズ・ライセンスの前責任者)には謝辞が送られてた。あと、スタンフォードでの上映会後の iChat を使った質疑応答のとき、Flemmingはクリエイティブ・コモンズのTシャツを来てたね。もし陰謀を疑いたいなら、その辺が怪しそう。)

<!--
On the other hand, Flemming has always had what Bill O’Reilly might call
a “parasitic” sense of self-promotion. His film *Nothing So Strange*
received press largely because it included scenes of Bill Gates being
assassinated. And during the California Recall, Flemming jumped into the
fray on the platform “If elected, I will resign.” (Thus making Lt.
Governor Bustamante governor, since at the time he was refusing to run,
thinking he’d draw support away from the actual governor.) When FOX sued
Al Franken for using the phrase “Fair and Balanced”, Flemming wrote a
play with the name. When Arnold Schwarzenegger sued the makers of a
bobblehead version of him, Flemming posted a photo of Arnold’s penis.
-->
とはいえ、そもそも Flemming は 宣伝がとてもがとてもうまい、Bill O’Reilly だったら parasitic とでも評しそうだけど。彼の前作 *Nothing So Strange* があれほど注目されたのも、Bill Gates が暗殺されるシーンがあったからだし。他にも、カリフォルニア州知事のリコール選挙のときなんて、

Both times, he insisted the works were a form of political protest, but
he still charged money for the products. He did the same when he
released portions of *Nothing So Strange* under a Creative Commons
license. It’s one thing to support free speech; it’s another to try to
make money off of other people’s support for it. What’s unsettling about
this film is not how Flemming is using various atheist groups to screen
and promote it ? that’s perfectly reasonable, especially since he’s
giving the DVDs to the groups at outrageously low prices.

No, what’s unsettling is a hidden feature on Flemming’s site called the
Grassroots Promotion Team or GPT. In general these things are nothing
new ? just personally, I remember volunteering for Apple when the iMac
came out and joining a “Street Team” website to promote a Buffy DVD. The
idea behind such sites is that your particular group of obsessive lonely
fans will spend their free time promoting your products on various
forums and websites in exchange for a chance to win some lame prizes.

It’s sad when big corporations do this, but when independent political
folks like Flemming do it, it becomes a little creepy. It’s also
problematic. Take the movie’s soundtrack, which is sold on Amazon.
Normally such obscure CDs have hardly any reviews. But this one not only
had 11, but they were all amazingly glowing. “Wow, this CD must be
really good,” I thought. But when I saw Flemming was awarding 100
“points” for each Amazon review, it suddenly made sense. If everyone
plays this game, Amazon reviews will quickly become meaningless, which
is why I don’t think it’s a very good idea to start.

The film is valuable and grassroots promotion of it is certainly a good
thing. I just wish it felt a little less like using well-meaning people
to make money for Flemming and a little more like a cooperative
community with the aim of spreading the Real News.

* * * * *

*Brian Flemming responds:*

Thanks for the kind words about the movie. I agree with some of your
criticism of the street team, but I think your aim is off the mark with
much of it.

1.  AMAZON REVIEWS. There’s an old phrase in publicity, “I don’t care if
    the review is positive or negative, just put the title in the
    headline.” As an indie filmmaker always struggling to get the word
    out against competing messages backed by tens of millions of
    dollars, I definitely subscribe to this philosophy. It was never the
    design of the movie’s street team to load up Amazon with praise
    (frankly, a mix of angry one-star reviews and passionate five-star
    reviews would be better). It’s no secret that authors and their
    publishers and friends stack the Amazon book reviews (as has been
    documented), but I don’t wish to add to that clutter. I’ve never
    asked anyone to post nice things on Amazon about the soundtrack CD
    for The God Who Wasn’t There, or to withhold negative statements
    (and I have not posted a review myself). Street team members are
    given a free (digital) copy of the soundtrack and encouraged to go
    to Amazon and post a review of the music?that’s it. About 5% of them
    do. There’s no incentive to make the review positive or negative.
    However, while I think the street team members’ reviews of the
    soundtrack CD on Amazon are sincere, and no harm has been done, this
    particular sample does naturally skew positive?if you’re on the
    street team, you probably like the film/soundtrack you’ve decided to
    back with your time. But then again, reviews are inherently
    biased?and fans tend to be more motivated than others in posting.
    Most reviews on Amazon for most media products are positive for that
    reason. I’ll freely admit to sending people to Amazon?but my goal is
    battling obscurity, not battling negative opinion. And I certainly
    can’t stop anyone from posting a negative review.

2.  THE STREET TEAM ITELF. A “street team” is a group of volunteer
    supporters who distribute flyers and stickers and otherwise spread
    the word about a band or film online and offline. You say, “It’s sad
    when big corporations do this, but when independent political folks
    like Flemming do it, it becomes a little creepy.” Here’s where I
    think your aim is considerably off the mark. To be opposed to a
    street team is nearly tantamount to being opposed to the very idea
    of promoting indie artists. I believe promotion should be honest and
    ethical, but promotion itself is not an evil. And organizing
    promotion is not an evil. To eliminate street teams would be largely
    to give up and turn over the marketplace to those who have the money
    to promote via advertising and other expensive means. It would
    strengthen messages backed by money and weaken messages backed by
    passion. I think the street team for The God Who Wasn’t There is a
    great example of passion being organized into action, and I’m proud
    of it. I give theatrical rights away for free?and then a group like
    SF Atheists holds a screening and earns upwards of \$1000 to help
    their extremely important efforts. Volunteers go to a website where
    grassroots action is made easier?and conversations all over the web
    get started over whether Jesus really did exist, a very legitimate
    question that is nonetheless the third rail of mainstream-media
    conversations about Christianity. Street teams aren’t “creepy,” and
    this one in particular is doing some very real, verifiable good.

3.  MONEY. You write that when I attacked Arnold Schwarzenegger and Bill
    O’Reilly via Fair Use Press, I “insisted the works were a form of
    political protest, but [Flemming] still charged money for the
    products. He did the same when he released portions of Nothing So
    Strange under a Creative Commons license. It’s one thing to support
    free speech; it’s another to try to make money off of other people’s
    support for it.” Really, I’m just shaking my head in wonder at this
    accusation. I have never made any profit whatsoever from any of my
    Fair Use Press e-books. The Schwarzenegger attack was given away,
    with a high-res “premium” edition sold at first for \$1 (both
    editions are free now and have been for about a year). I added a \$1
    price to that specifically to demonstrate fair use?that I wasn’t
    taking a “noncommercial” copout, so Schwarzenegger and his attorney
    couldn’t claim that’s why they didn’t sue. That’s what my activism
    through Fair Use Press is about?demonstrating the limits of fair
    use. I want people to look at what I do, see that I got away with
    it, and then do more of the same. The commercial marketplace?where
    messages like Bill O’Reilly’s already live?is an important
    battlefield in this fight. Just because I fight in that space
    doesn’t mean I’m making a profit from Fair Use Press. I don’t, and
    it certainly isn’t part of the plan (I spend far more on promotion
    and advertising than I take in). And my best-case scenario for The
    God Who Wasn’t There is to break even on marketing expenses
    (production costs are already written off, gladly, as a loss). All
    of my indie-film work and free-culture activism operates in the red,
    subsidized by the Hollywood work-for-hire assignments I take that
    also pay my rent. I’m not, as you say, “using well-meaning people to
    make money.” I’m putting in my own money and time to the same
    purpose as the people I’m working side-by-side with. The fact that
    we earn revenue to try to keep the project somewhat self-sustaining
    cannot reasonably be termed exploitation.

Criticism is a good thing, Aaron, and we free-culture activists of
course do need to criticize each other where criticism is justified. And
I certainly should be held publicly accountable for anything I publicly
do. But in this case I really think you’ve gone overboard and made
accusations that have little merit.

* * * * *

*Aaron replies:*

Thanks for responding. I can’t say I’m *glad* to hear you don’t expect
to turn a profit on any of this, but it certainly allays any fears of
exploitation.

But I feel like you missed my main point about the street team ? the one
I ended the article with: “I just wish it felt … a little more like a
cooperative community with the aim of spreading the Real News.” There’s
nothing wrong with telling people about music or movies you like, or
even putting up posters to promote them. Where it gets creepy is when
this natural enthusiasm is co-opted and channeled into a structured,
top-down sort of system. Now I’m not just expressing my opinions, I’m
following orders so I can get goodies. That fundamentally changes
things.

Maybe an analogy will help. My mom likes telling people about
interesting things I’ve done. There’s nothing wrong with this ? the
people she talks to like knowing this stuff. But you have to admit it
would be creepy if I started providing my mom with a list of my
achievements and awarding her points every time she found a way to
mention them. Mom begins to feel used, her friends begin to feel duped,
and I look like a narcissist.

There’s no need to get rid of the promotion system, just scale it back a
little. Provide a list of suggested actions, a forum where people can
talk about what they’re doing, and then offer to mail a t-shirt or
something to people who work hard.

You see, contrary to popular opinion ? even in the free culture
community, oddly enough ? rewards are incredibly destructive. Study
after study shows they actually *demotivate* people, encourage people to
cheat and lie, and cause them to make stupid decisions about trade-offs.
For an excellent book on the subject, see *Alfie Kohn’s Punished By
Rewards*.

-   [Official site](http://www.thegodmovie.com/)
-   [Flemming’s post on independent
    distribution](http://www.slumdance.com/blogs/brian_flemming/archives/001604.html)

