Talking Right
=============

October 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/talkingright)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_talkingright)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586483862)

Government, John Dewey famously said, is the shadow cast by big business
over society. And political language, Geoffrey Nunberg argues in
*Talking Right*, is the shadow cast by government. Democrats, he points
out, seem to think language has a talismanic power, that if only they
can find the right catch phrase or slogan, they can pull people over to
their side. “Liberal” must become “progressive”, “family values” must
become “valuing families”. There’s an intellectual cleverness to such
stunts, and as a Berkeley linguist, Nunberg must want to believe in
them. But he doesn’t. The words, he explains, are just a side-effect of
the larger political situation. Dewey explained that attempts to change
the shadow will have no effect without a change in the substance, and
Nunberg heartily agrees.

It’s hard to see how it could be otherwise, but Democrats have suffered
from a stubborn literalism in political discourse: thinking they can
beat the charge of big government by launching programs cutting down on
bureaucratic waste, thinking they can reclaim the issue of values by
pointing to their love of tolerance and fairness, thinking they can
dodge the charge of latte-sipping by donning a hunting cap and rifle. In
reality, the issues go much deeper: big government is an attack on the
notion that government can do good, values refers to a feeling of
national morals run amok, and the latte-sipping charge is an attempt to
distract voters from bigger issues of class. Nunberg even chastises his
colleague George Lakoff for assuming that the current packages of
political positions have any deeper meanings, rather than just being
accidents of history.

Nunberg is an essayist—his commentaries for NPR’s *Fresh Air* are a
national treasure—and his style, while eminently readable, doesn’t
translate well to a long book, where his points get lost in a field of
anecdotes. But beneath all the stories about how conservatives eat more
brie and liberal used to be a mantle claimed by everyone, Nunberg’s
point is a familiar one: if the Democrats want to win, they must begin
telling full-throated populist stories about how the economic elite are
capturing the wealth of our country and how we need government to take
it back. The point is no less true for being popular, and it’s
heartening to find that investigation from yet another perspective
yields the same conclusions.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1586483862)


[image1_talkingright]: image1_talkingright.jpg