False Outliers
==============

September 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/writefp)

* * * * *

So far [my Wikipedia
script](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia) has churned
through about 200 articles, calculating who wrote what in each. This
morning I looked through them to see if there were any that didn’t match
my theory. It printed out a couple and I decided to investigate.

The first it found was [Alkane](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alkane), a
long technical article about acyclic saturated hydrocarbons that it said
was largely written by
[Physchim62](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Physchim62). Yesterday a
good friend was telling me that he thought long technical articles were
likely written by a single person, so I immediately thought that here
was the proof that he was right. But, just to check, I decided to look
in the edit history to make sure my script hadn’t made an error.

It hadn’t, I found, but once again simply looking at the numbers missed
the larger point. Physchim62 had indeed contributed most of the article,
but according to the edit comments, it was by translating the German
version! I don’t have the German data, but presumably it was written in
the same incremental way as most of the articles in my study.

The next serious case was [Characters in Atlas
Shrugged](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Characters_in_Atlas_Shrugged),
which the script said was written by CatherineMunro. Again, it seemed
plausible that one person could have written all those character bios.
But again, an investigation into the actual edit history found that
Munro hadn’t written them, instead she’d copied them from a bunch of
subpages, merging them into one bigger page.

The final serious example was [Anchorage,
Alaska](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchorage%2C_Alaska), which
appeared to have been written by
[JeffreyAllen1975](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:JeffreyAllen1975).
Here the contributions seemed quite genuine; JeffreyAllen1975 made tons
of edits each contributing a paragraph at a time. The work seemed to
take quite a toll on him; at his user page he noted “I just got
burned-out and tired of the online encyclopedia. My time is being taken
away from me by being with Wikipedia.” He lasted about four months.

Still, something seemed fishy about JeffreyAllen1975, so I decided to
investigate further. Currently, the Anchorage page has a tag noting that
“The current version of the article or section reads like an
advertisement.” A bit of Googling revealed why: JeffreyAllen1975’s
contributions had been copied-and-pasted from other websites, like [the
Anchorage Chamber of
Commerce](http://www.anchoragechamber.org/info/relocation.htm)
(“Anchorage’s public school system is ranked among the best in the
nation. … The district’s average SAT and ACT College entrance exam
scores are consistently above the national average and Advanced
Placement courses are offered at each of the district’s larger high
schools.”).

I suspect JeffreyAllen1975 didn’t know what he was doing; his writing
style suggests he’s just a kid: “In my free time, I am very proud of
my-self by how much I’ve learned by making good edits on Wikipedia
articles.” I’m pretty sure he just thought he was helping the project:
“Wikipedia is like the real encyclopedia books (A thru Z) that you see
in the library, but better.” But his plagiarism will still have to be
removed.

When I started, just looking at the numbers these seemed to be several
cases that strongly contradicted my theory. And had I just stuck to
looking at the numbers, I would have believed that to be the case as
well. But, once again, investigation shows the picture to be far more
interesting: translation, reorganization, and plagiarism. Exciting
stuff!
