Getting Past
============

February 8, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/gettingpast)

* * * * *

He called me into his office. It was an imposing room, wood paneling and
a window opening on to a picturesque view of the water. An ornate light
fixture hung from the ceiling, illuminating the mahogany desk, neatly
organized with boxes OUT and IN, with a stack of paper, with a pad for
writing on. There was no computer. He didn’t need a computer. A computer
would have ruined the look.

The walls were lined with bookshelves and the bookshelves were lined
with management texts. Books on how to make people eat cheese, how to
make them say yes, how to make them think positive thoughts, how to make
them get rich. Books on locks and unlocking, thoughts and unthinking,
beings and unbeing.

“Take a seat, Geoffrey,” he said, looking at me from behind glasses, a
tailored suit hanging on his frame. I obeyed, as I always did. It was an
order.

“There’s been concern around the office,” he said. No agent. Not “people
are concerned”, not “I’m concerned”, simply that “there’s been concern”,
as if it was some poisonous gas that had been leaking out of my cubicle,
green fumes floating in mid-air.

“There’s been concern that you’re not being a team player.” A sports
metaphor. Here we are, all rocketing towards the goal, filing our TPS
reports in tandem, and me? I’m not being a team player. I’m sitting in
the corner playing Minesweeper or one of those online flash games with
the little jewels. The team’s let down. I’m holding everyone up.

“I think that the best way forward is for us to get past this,” he
explains. Isn’t that always the case? If we’re on a path, and there’s a
rock, then obviously we have to go past it to go forward. We could go a
different direction, but then we wouldn’t be going forward anymore. But
how did I become a rock?

“It’s clear to all of us,” he says. But who’s “us”? There’s only him
here. “It’s clear to all of us that your heart’s not in it.” I imagine
myself, lying on the surgery table, the bright light shining from above,
with an army of hims surrounding me; they’re the us. One of him asks
another for the scalpel, takes it, begins cutting out my still-beating
heart. Aha, they think, his heart’s not in it — it’s still in him.

They toss the heart in the trash and file out. They need to interview
another job candidate.
