Who Writes Wikipedia? — Responses
=================================

September 5, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowritescomments)

* * * * *

([back to Who writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia))

First, on a personal note, let me simply say thanks. I probably put more
work yesterday’s post than anything else I’ve ever written. In addition
to the research I describe, I’ve spent my free time the past few weeks
going over the text of the article again and again, agonizing about the
proper phrasing, getting everything just right. It was definitely worth
it. My sincere thanks to everyone who made it possible.

Further research is needed
--------------------------

Getting down to business, many are interested in pursuing this line of
quantitative research. The work I did was intended for an article, not a
formal paper, and while I’m fairly confident the basic principles are
correct there’s plenty more work to be done.

I was heartened to discover research by Seth Anthony which,
independently and more formally, came to largely the same conclusions.
[As he explained on Reddit](http://reddit.com/info/g9si/comments/cgc62):
“Only about 10% of all edits on Wikipedia actually add substantive
content. Roughly a third of those edits are made by someone without an
account, half of someone without a userpage (a minimal threshhold for
considering whether someone is part of the “community”). The average
content-adder has less than 200 edits: much less, in many cases.”

One of the more interesting things Anthony did was look at the work of
admins in detail. In his sample, he noticed that none of the genuinely
substantive edits were done by official site admins. He found that when
admins originally joined the site, they contributed a lot less
frequently and consistently but created a lot more substantive content.
After they became admins, however, they turned into what Anthony calls
“janitors”.

One of the wonderful things about Wikipedia is that literally all of the
data — every single edit and practically every discussion made on or
about the site — is easily available. So there’s an enormous amount more
to learn about how it gets written. (In addition to nailing down what we
know so far a little better.) If you’re interested to contributing to
further research on this and related topics, [send me an
email](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) and I’ll try to coordinate something.

Who gets to vote?
-----------------

Another response was to think about the implications on who gets to vote
in Wikipedia elections. ‘I tried to vote,’ [commented
Eric](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c3), ‘but since I
am one of your “occasional contributors” (I’ve edited only one article
to make content changes), I am not eligible[]. It appears that the
opinions of “occasional contributors” will not be heard.’ Others,
including William Loughborough and Jason Clark, expressed similar
sentiments. ‘HURRAH, I am DISENFRANCHISED’, [complained Bill
Coderre](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c29).

Alienating the world
--------------------

But by far the most common response was people sharing their experience
trying to contribute to Wikipedia, only to see their contributions be
quickly reverted or rewritten.

‘You can definately tell the “regulars” on Wikipedia’, [joshd
noted](http://reddit.com/info/g9si/comments/cga0i). ‘They’re the ones
who … delete your newly reate[d] article without hesitation, or revert
your changes and accuse you of vandalis[m] without even checking the
changes you made.’ ‘Every modification I made was deleted without any
comment’, [complained
CafeCafe](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c17). ‘I know
there are a lot of people like me willing to help, but unless there is a
real discussion behind, I won’t waste my time to help anymore which is a
sad thing.’

[bowerbird
complained](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c17) that
‘my contributions … have been warped by people who merely want to “make
it sound like an encyclopedia” without having any knowledge of the
topic’ [while Ian](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c19)
‘got fed up of the self-appointed officious jobsworths who [rewrite
your] things [to] fit “their vision” … . My time is too valuable to
argue with these people…’

[Bill Coderre
told](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia#c29) of how he
wrote entire articles from scratch, only to see them ruined ‘by some
super-editors, who removed content, and turned what I thought was
gosh-darn good writing into crap. … These people, by and large, “edited”
thousands of articles. In most cases, these edits were to remove
material that they found unsuitable. Indeed, some of the people-history
pages contained little “awards” that people gave each other — for
removing content from Wikipedia.’

And it seems like half of all the people I meet have a story about being
listed for deletion and the nasty insults that ensued. Seriously, there
have been numerous times I’ve said something about Wikipedia to a
relatively well-known person and they responded back with a story about
how someone insulted and deleted them. ‘[T]here are culture vultures
overlooking Wkidpedia waiting to kill anything that doesn’t fit the
norm’, [wrote
Mediangler](http://www.mediangler.com/2006/09/04/who-writes-wikipedia-but-where-do-you-go-for-this-data-european-web-20-again-chuquet/).

Why does this matter? Why should we listen to the angry complaints of
random people on the Internet? If occasional contributors are the
lifeblood of Wikipedia, as the evidence suggests, then alienating such
people just can’t be healthy for the project. As Ian wrote, ‘if we are
to invest our valuable time contributing some expert knowledge on some
subject, we want to know that our work will remain there for others, and
not just keep getting reverted out in seconds by some control freak that
knows nothing about the actual subject. … your article proves the
exist[e]nce of this “inner gang” that I feel are actually holding
Wikipedia back. To allow Wikipedia to grow and really pick the brains of
the experts around the world, you need to do something to break up this
inner gang and the mini empires they are building for themselves.’

Perhaps we can improve things with new rules (not only should you [not
bite the newcomers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:BITE), you shouldn’t
even bark at them) and new software (making it easier to discuss changes
and defend contributions), but most importantly, it’s going to require a
cultural shift. Larry Sanger famously suggested that [Wikipedia must
jettison its
anti-elitism](http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2004/12/30/142458/25) so
that experts could feel more comfortable contributing. I think the real
solution is the opposite: Wikipedians must jettison their *elitism* and
welcome the newbie masses as genuine contributors to the project, as
people to respect, not filter out.
