Products That Should Exist
==========================

December 29, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/buildme)

* * * * *

**A free Gmail clone.** A lot of people I know use Gmail for email. It’s
not because they don’t have access to servers or can’t afford a couple
gigabytes of disk space. It’s because Gmail is simply the best interface
for email out there right now. It’d be even better if it was free
software, though.

The biggest problem with Gmail is that you can’t run it offline. But if
it was free software, you could run it on your local machine and use it
even when not connected to the net. This would also have the nice
benefit of making it much faster for the user. Some synchronization code
would be necessary, but it’d be worth it.

Gmail isn’t all that complicated; this really shouldn’t be that hard.

**A nice OS X Tor interface.** I’ve talked to a bunch of people who
would like to use Tor, but find it just too complicated. Ideally, the
interface should be very simple. You download the Tor binary and
double-click it to start using Tor and quit out to stop. And so that you
know it’s working, it’ll have a little window that will show you the
names of servers you’re connected to.

OS X has APIs for changing the system preferences; just use those to set
the SOCKS server properly. Tor has APIs for finding out when you connect
to a server, use those to set the display. For a decent Mac programmer,
this can’t be more than a day’s worth of work, but it’d make Tor vastly
more usable.

**Decent backup software.** I’ve [already written about
this](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/lazybackup). It still hasn’t
happened.

If anyone’s interested in building any of these, [let me
know](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) and perhaps we can work something out.
