Visiting Mission Hill
=====================

October 9, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/missionhill)

* * * * *

The new Mission Hill School is located in the middle of Boston, in
Roxbury. By the time the subway reaches the neighborhood, all the white
people have already left the train. The school itself is nestled into a
building long-ago abandoned by a Catholic High School. When it first
moved in, they found the remnants of the last high school class had
never been removed, their effects somehow frozen in time.

The streets are gritty, the faces dark, and I don’t exactly feel
comfortable walking outside. This isn’t the place you imagine starting a
“progressive school”. And when you learn that Mission Hill is a public
school, part of the Boston Public School system, it seems even less
likely. Yet, when educational reformer Deborah Meier set out to build a
modern school, that’s what she picked. They got a special license from
the government and the unions to operate it as a “pilot school” and
begun tossing out the normal rules and building it from the ground up on
progressive principles.

Meier has since left, as has Straughton, her successor, leaving a woman
who introduces herself as Ayla (everyone here goes by their first
names). Ayla seems a little overwhelmed, both by the demands of the job
and her sudden promotion to the top, but she somehow handles everything
with kindness and composure.

“Welcome to our school,” she says, smiling so sweetly that I have
trouble believing she’s a principle. As she continues talking, outlining
the school’s unique mission and the “habits of mind” it hopes to
achieve, some kids begin running and screaming in the halls outside. She
gets up and heads to the door. *Now we’ll get to see the other side of
her*, I think. *She seems nice enough to us but she’ll start screaming
at the kids.* But she doesn’t say a thing, she just closes the door and
sits back down with us.

After the overview, she takes us upstairs to get a sense of what
classroom life is like. The school is nice enough — “I wish I went to
school here,” the education students visiting with me gush — with happy
decorations, small class sizes (20 is the max.), friendly and dedicated
teachers, and very active classrooms. The kids, a very racially mixed
crowd, seem quite bright and full of joy, and I can’t help smiling for
the first twenty minutes, as we watch them bouncing around painting and
sculpting.

When we move to math class, things are a little different. For “morning
math meeting”, the kids sit in a circle in the front of the room, as the
teacher goes around asking each one to say something about subtraction
before writing it on the board. The teacher tries to be non-judgmental,
but when someone says something wrong, he can’t help but ask the rest of
the class if they think what that person said was right. (Once, when it
actually was right, he has to add the caveat “I’m not saying it was
wrong, I just want to know what other people think.”) At one point, a
child asks him to write a one with twelve zeroes up on the board, saying
it’s a million. The teacher points out that it’s a lot more than a
million and counts out for the class what it actually is. He miscounts
though, and claims it’s one septillion. (It’s only a trillion.) I don’t
say anything.

Later, the teacher tells us how much he likes morning math circle
because it gives everyone a chance to speak and think about things. But
it’s clear that most of the students are bored most of the time
(including me) while others don’t exactly enjoy speaking. Afraid they’ll
get the answer wrong and look stupid in front of the whole class, they
speak quietly or cover their mouth while they talk, trying to make sure
only the teacher can hear them. When the teacher indicates they were
right and asks them to speak up, then they’re happy to tell the rest of
the class.

After everyone has spoken, the class adjourns so people can get the
memoirs they’ve been working on to share with everyone. We head to a
class where they’re shouting out the names of states on a map. The class
is going to explain how America became America by looking at the
patterns of migration on maps, the teacher assures us, but right now it
looks like the class is only memorizing how to spell stupid state names.

At this point our visit is officially over and we have to head back to a
final wrap-up with the principal, but as I think about it and think back
to my own school experience, I begin to wonder: is this any different?

There are some differences, of course. This school feels much cozier and
comfortable, for example. I don’t feel odd just hanging out in the
halls. The teachers are all very self-conscious about trying to be
“student-centered” and “democratic” (the principal explains how they
terminated their relationship with an afterschool program because they
refused to stop giving kids rewards, referring skeptical
student-teachers to Alfie Kohn’s books for “an extreme position” on
rewards). But while their hearts may be in better places, it’s not clear
the effect is that much different.

Still, that in itself is a pretty incredible achievement. I went to an
extremely rich, white, private school on an expensive and lush campus in
the middle of the richest zip code in the country. That you can build a
public school of equal quality for kids in the inner city is an
impressive achievement. Just not the one I was expecting.
