The Intentionality of Evil
==========================

June 23, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil)

* * * * *

[ **English** | [中文](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil.zh) |
[Deutsch](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/intentionalevil.de) ]

As children we’re fed a steady diet of comic books (and now, movies
based off of them) in which brave heros save the planet from evil
people. It’s become practically conventional wisdom that such stories
wrongly make the line between good and evil too clear — the world is
more nuanced than that, we’re told — but this isn’t actually the problem
with these stories. The problem is that the villains *know* they’re
evil.

And people really grow up thinking things work this way: evil people
intentionally do evil things. But this just doesn’t happen. Nobody
thinks they’re doing evil — maybe because it’s just impossible to be
intentionally evil, maybe because it’s easier and more effective to
convince yourself you’re good — but every major villain had some
justification to explain why what they were doing was good. *Everybody*
thinks they’re good.

And if that’s the case, then intentionality doesn’t really matter. It’s
no defense to say (to take a recently famous example) that New York
bankers were just doing their jobs, convinced that they were helping the
poor or something, because everybody thinks they’re just doing their
jobs; Eichmann thought he was just doing his job.

Eichmann, of course, is the right example because it was Hannah Arendt’s
book *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil* that is
famously cited for this thesis. Eichmann, like almost all terrorists and
killers, was by our standards a perfectly normal and healthy guy doing
what he thought were perfectly reasonable things.

And if that normal guy could do it, so could we. And while we could
argue who’s worse — them or us — it’s a pointless game since its *our*
actions that we’re responsible for. And looking around, there’s no
shortage of monstrous crimes that we’ve committed.

So the next time you mention one to someone and they reply “yes, but we
did with a good intent” explain to them that’s no defense; the only
people who don’t are characters in comic books.
