Justifications for Myself
=========================

February 6, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rhetocc)

* * * * *

You’re at a party and you find yourself sitting next to an rather
geeky-looking fellow with thick black glasses. He looks like a nice
enough guy and, after all, making smalltalk is only polite, so you ask
him what he does. “I’m an entomologist,” he explains. “Oh,” you say,
stalling for time. “An entomologist.” You search your databanks for
something you can say regarding entomology. “Doesn’t it get boring
pasting all those little bugs onto those little cards?” you say. He
looks you straight in the eye. “Actually, no,” he says. “It’s not like
that at all.”

Michael Bérubé seems to often find himself as that man at the party. As
an academic at a state college in Pennsylvania, he’s surrounded by
Republicans who want to cut off public support for tenured radicals like
him. As a postmodern literary theorist who writes for public-interest
journals, he’s surrounded by those who think his field is meaninglessly
obscure. As a professor of cultural studies, he’s surrounded by those
who think he’s wasting his time researching trash. And as a cultural
leftist with liberal political views, he’s surrounded by friends who
find his nuanced political views a personal affront.

In *Rhetorical Occasions*, Bérubé collects a series of essays, speeches,
articles, and blog posts in which he tries his best to defend himself
from all such charges. And while that doesn’t sound like a recipe for
good literature, he makes it work. Like my entomologist friend, Bérubé
is such a kind-hearted, clear-spoken fellow that it’s fun to simply hear
him out. The result is a book even better than Bérubé’s [2006
bestseller](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/radicalarts), *What’s Liberal
About the Liberal Arts?*

The difference is that this time Bérubé is writing for his fellow
insiders, not outsiders, so instead of his cleaned-up defense of
academic life and his tidied-up summaries of freshman classes, you get
the real dirt on the way people dig knives into each other at MLA
meetings and excerpts from graduate introductory courses.

The book isn’t always perfect. Bérubé’s writes clearly and well, but
sometimes even his careful explanations assume a bit too much background
from the reader. “It sounds almost like a Monty Python bit,” he says at
one point; “you expect to hear next that Alexander Kerensky was defeated
by the experimental poetics of the Opoyaz group, and that the Battle of
the Journals set the terms for the Second Congress of Soviets in October
1917.” I have to admit, that was not what I was expecting to hear next.

And while Bérubé is fairly good about mentioning his opponents’
arguments (and this is a book with a lot of opponents, from ice hockey
players to Stanley Fish), he sometimes responds to them with an
obtuseness that borders on intellectual dishonesty. He notes that he was
“derided on the far left [for] my craven desire to break into corporate
mass media by repudiating Chomsky. I wrote it for *Context: A Forum for
Literary Arts and Culture*, [a journal] not available for purchase
anywhere in the country. It is distributed only to independent
bookstores, in print runs of five thousand. So I wonder just how much
further from the corporate mass media Chomsky’s fans would like me to
get before I am permitted to disagree with them.” It’s one of the book’s
best lines, at least until you get a couple essays later when you find
Bérubé reprised the criticism for an op-ed in the *Boston Globe*.

But the meat of the book is not in Bérubé’s politics (which, reprising
discussions between 9/11 and the war in Iraq, actually made me feel
queasy), but in his academics. In even intellectual popular culture,
it’s hard to find examples of postmodern literary theory that are
anything other than critics taking a whack or exponents making it easy
for them. Alan Sokal gets up and says that social constructionism is
absurd and Stanley Fish fights back by insisting the rules of physics
are just as manmade as the rules of baseball. Roger Kimball complaints
that postmodern theorists are being deliberately obtuse and Slavoj Žižek
responds by wondering whether “Heidegger’s ‘deconstruction’ of the
metaphysics of subjectivity … undermine[s] the very possibility of a
philosophically grounded resistance.”

But Bérubé manages to make such debates seem comprehensible and, what’s
more, worth comprehending. Bérubé’s passing references to “Stephen
Greenblatt, Catherine Gallagher, nancy Armstrong, Even Sedgwick, and
Judith Butler” makes you think that recognizing such names is as much a
duty of an educated person as following Sokal’s references to Niels
Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and (as in famous footnote 26) Rebecca
Goldstein.

I just hope there are more patient teachers like Bérubé to help one
finish the job.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0807857777)

