Transparency is Bunk
====================

April 23, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/transparencybunk)

* * * * *

*Adapted from an impromptu rant I gave to some people interested in
funding government transparency projects.*

I’ve spent the past year and change working on a site, watchdog.net,
that publishes government information online. In doing that, I’ve
learned a lot: I’ve looked at everything from pollution records to voter
registration databases and I’ve figured out a number of bureacratic
tricks to get information out of the government. But I’ve also become
increasingly skeptical of the transparency project in general, at least
as it’s carried out in the US.

The way a typical US transparency project works is pretty simple. You
find a government database, work hard to get or parse a copy, and then
put it online with some nice visualizations.

The problem is that reality doesn’t live in the databases. Instead, the
databases that are made available, even if grudgingly, form a kind of
official cover story, a veil of lies over the real workings of
government. If you visit a site like GovTrack, which publishes
information on what Congresspeople are up to, you find that all of
Congress’s votes are on inane items like declaring holidays and naming
post offices. The real action is buried in obscure subchapters of
innocuous-sounding bills and voted on under emergency provisions that
let everything happen without public disclosure.

So government transparency sites end up having three possible effects.
The vast majority of them simply promote these official cover stories,
misleading the public about what’s really going on. The unusually
cutting ones simply make plain the mindnumbing universality of waste and
corruption, and thus promote apathy. And on very rare occasions you have
a “success”: an extreme case is located through your work, brought to
justice, and then everyone goes home thinking the problem has been
solved, as the real corruption continues on as before.

In short, the generous impulses behind transparency sites end up doing
more harm than good.

But this is nothing new. The whole [history of the “good government”
movement](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html) in
the US is of “reformers” who, intentionally or otherwise, weakened the
cause of democracy. They too were primarily supported by large
foundations, mostly Ford and Rockefeller. They replaced
democratically-elected mayors with professional city managers, which
required a supermajority to overrule. They insisted on nonpartisan
elections, making it difficult to organize people into political blocs.
Arguing it would reduce corruption, they insisted city politicians serve
without paying, ensuring the jobs were only open to the wealthy.

I worry that transparency groups may be making the same “mistake”.

These are some dark thoughts, so I want to add a helpful alternative:
journalism. Investigative journalism lives up to the promise that
transparency sites make. Let me give three examples: Silverstein,
Taibbi, Caro.

[Ken Silverstein](http://www.harpers.org/subjects/KenSilverstein)
regularly writes brilliant pieces about the influence of money in
politics. And he uses these sorts of databases to do so. But the
databases are always a small part of a larger picture, supplemented with
interviews, documents, and even undercover investigation — he recently
did a piece where he posted as a representative of the government of
Turkmenistan and described how he was wined and dined by lobbyists eager
to build support for that noxious regime. The story, and much more, is
told in his book
*[Turkmeniscam](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140006743X)*. (His book
*[Washington Babylon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/1859840922)* is
similarly indispensible.)

Matt Taibbi, in his book *[The Great
Derangement](http://books.theinfo.org/go/038552062X)*, describes how
Congress really works. He goes to the capitol and lays out the whole
scene: the Congressmen naming post offices on the House floor, the
journalists typing in the press releases they’re handed, the key actions
going on behind the scenes and out of the public eye, the continual use
of emergency procedures to evade disclosure laws.

And Robert Caro, in his incredible book *[The Power
Broker](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245)* (one of the very best
books ever published, I’m convinced) takes on this fundamental political
question of “Who’s actually responsible for what my government is
doing?” For forty years, everyone in New York thought they knew the
answer: power was held by the city council, the mayor, the state
legislature, and the governor. After all, they run the government,
right?

And for forty years, they were all wrong. Power was held — held, for the
most part, *absolutely*, without any checks or outside influence — by
one man: Parks Commissioner Robert Moses. All that time, everyone
(especially the press) treated Robert Moses as merely the Parks
Commissioner, a mere public servant serving his elected officials. In
reality, he pulled the strings of all those elected officials.

These journalists tackled all the major questions supposedly addressed
by US transparency sites — who’s buying influence? what is Congress
doing? who’s in power in my neighborhood? — and not only tell a richer,
more informative story, but come to strikingly different answers to the
questions. In this era where investigative reporting budgets have been
cut to the bone and newspapers are folding left and right, it’s fallen
to nonprofits like ProPublica and the Center for Independent Media and,
from a previous era, the Center for Public Integrity, to pick up the
slack. They’ve been using the Internet in innovative ways to supplement
good old-fashioned narrative journalism, where transparency sites are a
supplement, rather than an end-in-themselves.

For too long we’ve been funding transparency projects on the model of
if-we-build-it-they-will-come: that we don’t know what transparency will
be useful for, but once it’s done it will lead to all sorts of exciting
possibilities. Well, we’ve built it. And they haven’t come. The only
success story its proponents can point to is that transparency projects
have bred even more transparency projects. I’m done working on
watchdog.net; I’m done hurting America. It’s time to give old-fashioned
narrative journalism a try.

*Previously:* [Disinfecting the Sunlight
Foundation](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dissunlight) [November 2006]
