Do I have too much faith in science?
====================================

August 10, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sciencefaith)

* * * * *

We live in a society where it’s almost impossible to give science too
much credit. Ever since the atom bomb and the space race, it’s just been
taken for granted that civilization advances through the progress of
science. Science—we are told—grows our food, cures our diseases, creates
our new technologies, and just generally propels the human race forward.

If science is the engine of progress, then those who have not been
captured under its spell must be dusty relics of prejudice and caprice.
Fields under the sway of hidebound tradition must be bulldozed and
renovated in the image of science. Thus doctors, instead of making
decisions by random whim, must be forced to practice “evidence-based
medicine” where all their prescriptions are backed by randomized
controlled trials. Policymakers, instead of just being bleeding-heart
do-gooders, must temper their enthusiasm for regulation by doing
cost-benefit analyses to see if their proposals make sense. Managers,
instead of following their intuition, must subject their strategies to
rigorous experiment—through A/B tests in the market.

But what’s weird about this mania for science is how unscientific it all
is. As far as I know, no studies have shown that evidence-based medicine
leads to better patient outcomes or that companies which practice
comprehensive A/B testing are more profitable than those which follow
their intuition. And the evidence that science is responsible for stuff
like increased life expectancy is [surprisingly
weak](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0060975199).

But there’s such a mania for science that even asking these questions
seems absurd. How could there possibly be evidence against
evidence-based medicine? The whole idea seems like a contradiction in
terms. But it is not.

Recent decades have seen science encroach on the kitchen, with
scientific approaches to cooking and cuisine. Where other chefs might
simply follow instructions they found on a yellowing scrap of paper, the
new modernists seek to understand the physics behind their actions. This
approach has led to some interesting new techniques, but it’s also led
us to understand that some of those silly traditions aren’t so silly
after all.

Eggs, for example, were often beaten in copper bowls. Why copper bowls?
Chefs might have been able to give you some kind of reason, but it would
have sounded silly to scientific ears. But the modernists discovered
that the ions in the copper ended up forming complex bonds with the
conalbumin in the eggs.

This was not something that chefs had ever established as scientific
knowledge—no aproned Isaac Newton ever discovered this was the right way
to cook the eggs—but it was knowledge chefs had nonetheless. It was, in
Polyani’s phrase, tacit knowledge, part of the things society genuinely
knew but was never able to write down or clearly prove.

Scientism systematically destroys tacit knowledge. If chefs were forced
to follow “evidence-based cooking”, not using anything special like a
copper bowl until their was a peer-reviewed double-blind randomized
controlled trial proving its effectiveness, the result surely would be
worse food. So why is it crazy to believe the same attitude leads to
worse medicine?

In business, too, scientism could be quite destructive. Can Steve Jobs
provide a proof for the rightness of every iPhone feature? Can Doug
Bowman do a scientific experiment to [justify his every shade of
blue](http://stopdesign.com/archive/2009/03/20/goodbye-google.html)?
Forcing them to could well make their work far worse instead of better.

Scientism even fails just within our own heads. If you’re struggling
with a decision, we’re taught to approach it more “scientifically”, by
systematically enumerating pros and cons and trying to weight and
balance them. That’s what Richard Feynman would do, right? Well, studies
have shown that this sort of explicit approach repeatable leads to
*worse* decisions than just going with your gut. Why? Presumably for the
same reason: your gut is full of tacit knowledge that it’s tough to
articulate and write down. Just focusing on the stuff you can make
explicit means throwing away everything else you know—destroying your
tacit knowledge.

Of course, there’s no guarantee that just trusting your gut will work
either. Intuition and tradition are often just as wrong as scientific
cluelessness. And in the cases where they genuinely have little to
contribute, throwing them away (or quarantining it until it’s proven by
scientific test) might not be such a bad idea. But I’ve always just
assumed that this was *always* true—that tradition and intuition had
nothing to contribute, unless carefully coached by scientific practice.
That science was the only way to get knowledge, rather than just another
way of codifying it. Now, instead of throwing it all away, I’m now
thinking I ought to spend more time finding ways to harness all that
tacit knowledge.
