Founder’s Syndrome
==================

October 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/founderssyndrome)

* * * * *

The simplest way to do something, of course, is to do it yourself. But
there’s lots of stuff to be done and not enough you to do it. You can
get around this a little bit by finding friends who are interested in
doing some of it themselves, but at some point you’re going to have to
start “delegating”, or getting somebody else to do it.

Now you’re moving up in the world. If you’re a decent manager, instead
of running one project, you can run five or ten. Instead of simply
directing your own labor, you can direct whole groups of people. Of
course, it’ll still be people doing what you wanted, but — funny thing —
people are smart enough that they’ll begin to get the gist of things on
their own and, if you do it right, your delegation will become an
organization. You can disappear for a week and things will keep on
marching.

But make no mistake, even those organizations are still following the
will of their erstwhile founder. Even as they get big, they betray
facets of the founder’s personality. The most obvious is in who is
respected. My friend Emmett Shear has a theory that in each company only
one class of people can be in charge and it’s going to be the class of
people the founders are in. At Apple, for example, the UI designers are
in charge, because Jobs obsesses over UI design. At Google, it’s the
programmers, because Larry and Sergey used to code. Even though the
founders aren’t directly involved in every project, their surrogates
still win the day.

Now the problem comes when the organization wants to grow beyond its
founder. This is most common on non-profits, where they even have a name
for it: founder’s syndrome. See, once you have all these people carrying
out your bidding, it’s pretty difficult to want to give that up. Maybe
you can have them do more projects, maybe you can give them more
flexibility in what they choose, but I can’t think of a single story
where the guy in charge voluntarily gave up his power. And that has a
severe cost (which I’ve come to calling the “power premium”) because
giving up your power is often the right thing to do.

In non-profits, for example, your organization is probably made up of a
bunch of independent-minded young people with a strong belief in
democracy. These people aren’t too happy being told what to do all the
time, especially when the instructions are pretty obviously not the best
thing for the non-profit’s mission. So they rebel against the founder,
and the founder tries to hold on to power, and things get very messy. (I
don’t know how things usually turn out in this situation. Maybe you
fight until the founder dies?)

Less well noticed is that the same mistake is made by for-profit
corporations as well, it’s just less obvious because the founder is the
fellow holding all the cash, so you fight about it at your peril. But
companies regularly do stupid things, even when if you asked all the
people in the company about it they would have told you they were
stupid. But in a capitalist economy, the founder has to maintain
control.

But the power premium has a even more serious cost. While many people
seem to be able to make the leap from doing something themselves to
building an organization to do it, nobody seems to have been very good
at taking the next step: going from an organization to a
meta-organization, an organization that hires other organizations to do
its work, rather than hiring people directly.

Why? Partly because few people get to be in charge of something the size
of Google, where they need to take that next step to grow, and perhaps
the trait of thinking that big is rare. But I think part of it is simply
because the people at the top can’t give up their power. Engaging
organizations means you’re no longer in charge of what people do or how
they do it; the organizations have to be in charge of that. And that
means you’re no longer a delegator, but more of a moderator. It’s
founder’s syndrome at the largest scale.
