Code, and Other Laws of Wikipedia
=================================

September 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: [Making More
Wikipedias](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)\
 Part 6: **Code, and Other Laws**\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Code is law, Lawrence Lessig famously said years ago, and time has not
robbed the idea of any of its force. The point, so eloquently defended
in his book *Code, and Other Laws of Cyberspace*, is that in the worlds
created by software, the design of the software regulates behavior just
as strongly as any formal law does; more effectively, in fact.

The point is obvious in some contexts. In the online 3D universe of
Second Life, if the software prevents you from typing a certain word,
that’s a far more effective restraint on speech in that world than any
US law could ever be in ours. But the point is far more subtle than
that; it applies with equal force to the world of Wikipedia, the
thriving community and culture that our wiki software creates.

For one thing, the software decides who gets to be part of the
community. If using it is clear and simple, then lots of people can use
it. But, if it’s complicated, then only those who take the time to learn
it are able to take part. And, as we’ve seen, lots of intelligent people
don’t even understand how to edit Wikipedia, let alone do any of the
other things on the site.

For another, the software decides how the community operates. Features
like administrative controls privilege some users over others. Support
for things like stable revisions decide what sorts of things get
published. The structure of talk pages help decide what and how things
get discussed.

The page design the site uses encourages specific actions by making some
links clear and prominent. Software functions like categories make
certain kinds of features possible. The formatting codes used for things
like infoboxes and links determine how easy it is for newcomers to edit
those pieces of the site.

All of these things are political choices, not technical ones. It’s not
like there’s a right answer that’s obvious to any intelligent
programmer. And these choices can have huge effects on the community.
That’s why it’s essential the community be involved in making these
decisions.

The current team of Wikipedia programmers is a volunteer group (although
a couple of them were recently hired by the Wikimedia Foundation so they
could live a little more comfortably) working much like a standard free
software community, discussing things on mailing lists and IRC channels.
They got together in person in the days before Wikimania to discuss some
of the current hot topics in the software.

One presentation was by a usability expert who told us about a study
done on how hard people found it to add a photo to a Wikipedia page. The
discussion after the presentation turned into a debate over *whether*
Wikipedia should be easy to to use. Some suggested that confused users
should just add their contributions in the wrong way and a more
experienced users would come along to clean their contributions up.
Others questioned whether confused users should be allowed to edit the
site at all — [were their contributions even
valuable?](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)

As a programmer, I have a great deal of respect for the members of my
trade. But with all due respect, are these really decisions that the
programmers should be making?

Meanwhile, Jimbo Wales also has a for-profit company, Wikia, which
recently received \$4 million in venture capital funding. Wales has
said, including in his keynote speech at Wikimania, that one of the
things he hopes to spend it on is hiring programmers to improve the
Wikipedia software.

This is the kind of thing that seems like a thoughtful gesture if you
think of the software as neutral — after all, improvements are
improvements — but becomes rather more problematic if technical choices
have political effects. Should executives and venture capitalists be
calling the shots on some of these issues?

The Wikipedia community is enormously vibrant and I have no doubt that
the site will manage to survive many software changes. But if we’re
concerned about more than mere survival, about how to make Wikipedia the
best that it can be, we need to start thinking about software design as
much as we think about the rest of our policy choices.
