Serenity: A Review
==================

September 29, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/serenity2)

* * * * *

Joss Whedon’s film *[Serenity](http://serenitymovie.com/)* comes out
tomorrow, the first new episode of his series *Firefly* in years. Go see
it; you won’t be disappointed. It’s almost certainly Joss’s best work
yet — mixing storyline tricks with biting humor with amazing battles and
beautiful surroundings. The cinematography, special effects, and music
are all grand. But most importantly, it’s just really, really fun.

I received a “press pass” as part of the “Serenity Blogger Bonanza” —
they invited bloggers to come see a free preview if they promised to
write about it. (My companion thought this seemed rather risky — what if
a bunch of opinionated bloggers all give it bad reviews?) They also
invited blog readers, but then they claimed that all the screenings were
full — I actually received a rejection letter — yet when we went to the
theater they were handing free tickets to people walking by on the
street and the theater wasn’t anywhere near full.

Still, it was a good turnout and full of fans. The person to my left
said she’d already seen the film twice (they previously did previews
without finished music and so on for hardcore fans) and planned to go to
the real premiere (her fourth screening) dressed as one of the
characters. But while the movie fits in perfectly with the story of the
TV series (I was surprised; I would have thought the studio would demand
changes (actually, I can’t recall of the space battles were silent like
they were in the TV show (sound can’t travel in space, of course))), one
need not have seen the TV series to understand or enjoy the film. In
fact, while the trailers mention Buffy and Angel, they don’t mention
Firefly at all.

It seemed like everyone there loved the film. As we left, my companion
commented, still in awe, “I can see why they let the bloggers into see
it.”
