Obama’s Next Move
=================

September 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/nextobama)

* * * * *

I’ve been hesitant to talk about political strategy this season. Partly
because it’s so cliched (everyone’s doing it), partly because it’s so
ephemeral, partly because it’s just boring. But I think the situation
Obama’s found himself in has larger resonances and coming up with a
solution to it is genuinely difficult.

For those who haven’t been following things, the story is this. There
are two candidates: Barack Obama, a young centrist Democrat who bills
himself as the post-partisan candidate of “change” (i.e. not Bush), and
John McCain, a fairly non-ideological 72-year-old Republican who has
decided to give up on his centrist inclinations and run far to the
right. For the first half of the campaign, Obama’s message has been that
he’s change while McCain is more of the same (visual: McCain hugging
Bush). McCain has argued that he’s got experience and courage while
Obama is not ready to lead.

This was exactly the campaign Obama had planned on and their strategy
was working perfectly; McCain was behind just about the whole time. So
McCain decided to shake things up and picked Sarah Palin, an unknown,
far-right woman to be VP and began campaigning on them being “the
original mavericks”. (McCain’s lack of ideology led the press to call
him a maverick for signing onto some liberal bills; Palin won her seat
through a primary challenge against corrupt Alaska Republicans.) Palin
is wildly inexperienced (and so is being kept from the press) and most
of her claims to be anti-corruption are complete lies, but the press has
been half-hearted in pointing this out.

So that’s the recap. Now the problem. Whenever they’re stuck,
conservatives have two traditional responses: swift-boating and
projection. Swift-boating is taking your opponent’s main asset and
making it a liability. The classic example is taking John Kerry’s
venerated war service and arguing that it was a fraud. But it can be
used more generally as well. So when someone says “We need to increase
welfare to help the poor,” the conservatives reply “Welfare doesn’t help
the poor — it just encourages them to be lazier.” Projection is take
your opponent’s main asset and claiming it to be your own. The classic
example here is that when the media is doing an effective job of
parroting your story, you get out in front and complain that it spends
its time parroting your *opponent’s* story. The projection response to
welfare is “No, we’re the ones who really want to help the poor — that’s
why we’re proposing an ownership society.”

It’s tough to swift-boat Obama on the issue of change. He’s young, he’s
black, he’s a Democrat. Calling him more of the same just seems
laughable. But, because of McCain’s history, saying that McCain is also
for change has more resonance.

So what does Obama do? Whichever direction he goes, McCain will just
follow him there. If Obama says he’s for *real* change, McCain will just
say he’s for real change too. To voters, it’ll seem like a toss-up.
Worse, a lot of Obama’s electoral strategy hinges on his massive
on-the-ground team of volunteers bringing out new voters. If he goes
negative (the obvious response), he’ll take the campaign down into a
mud-slinging match and turn all those new voters off. The only way to
win is to go someplace McCain can’t. And the one place McCain can’t go
is the issues. (Gasp! We might actually have to talk about issues.)

McCain’s plans have been the most nutzoid right-wing proposals: end
employer-paid health care, permanent bases in Iraq, tax cuts for the
rich, and head-in-the-sand about energy. They’re big juicy targets. But
so far, Obama has been incompetent about going after them. Whenever his
ads begin talking about issues, they suddenly switch into policy-wonk
mode and begin using so many long words that even I don’t understand
what he’s going on about. And when they criticize John McCain they just
seem like they’re making stuff up. To win, Obama’s ads will have to make
the issues sexy — he’ll have to find a way to make talking about policy
entertaining.

Crazy as that sounds, it isn’t impossible. There’s real substance to
these policy disagreements — they’re genuinely interesting. John McCain,
for example, thinks the big problem with health care in America is that
people have too much of it. Employers buy health care in bulk for all
their workers, whether they need it or not. Instead, he thinks each
American should pay for health care on their own. That’s crazy, but it’s
substantive crazy.

Instead of taking the campaign further into the mud, Obama will seem as
if he’s raising it back up to talk about the issues. Hell, the media
might even feel the pressure and start talking about issues themselves.
It’s too late in the game for McCain to rewrite all his policy
proposals, so he’ll either have to try to defend them (a complete losing
battle) or he’ll have to keep slinging mud at someone who is trying to
have a serious discussion. Either way, he looks bad.

I have no idea if the Obama campaign is going to do anything like this.
But it’s the only way I see out of their rut.
