Perfect Institutions
====================

June 8, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/perfectinstitutions)

* * * * *

In pretty much every major city in this country, there’s a Hollister Co.
clothing store — there are over 500 of them in all. Walk inside and it’s
like being transported: the windows are shuttered so they control the
light, the entrance has an L-shaped route so that you don’t catch a hint
of the outside world, the floors and ceilings have been replaced with
new patterns, thumping music controls the sound, special scents are
pumped into the air to control what you smell. An attractive young
person greets you at the door. You’re in a different world.

And, to a first approximation, this new world is perfect. Sure, if you
search hard, maybe you can find a ruffled edge on a shirt somewhere, but
it’s hardly enough to spoil the illusion. And this is what strikes me:
that in every major city, in this deeply-flawed country, you can find a
little bit of perfection.

No one person, I am sure, can accomplish this kind of perfection. Think
about yourself being responsible for creating such a place. Surely
there’s some part of it you’re not capable of doing — do you know where
to find the perfect music and the perfect scent and someone to tile the
ceiling and someone to take a perfect photograph for the wall and on and
on? And even if you are that kind of heroic generalist, who can handle
all of that, could you maintain it without flagging, day after day,
without loosening your standards, without giving in to the exhaustion
that maintaining such a perfect appearance takes? OK, perhaps you have
more willpower than I — but unless you’re Amy Goodman, even you must
take ill sometimes, must have a family emergency to attend to, or
*something*! Nobody’s perfect, right?

And yet, here they are, five hundred stores of perfection. (You may
detest what they are perfect at, but that’s not my point. The point is
that they have a vision and make it stick.) How do they do it?

“It’s obvious,” you say. “They don’t just have one person — they have a
whole bunch. When one falls down on the job, or skips out sick, the
others pick up the slack.” But those others are imperfect too. It seems
far from preordained that a bunch of imperfection combines to create the
perfect — it seems just as plausible that combining imperfect people
causes the imperfections to multiply, that the whole is far less than
the sum of its parts (I’m sure we’ve all been in such situations).

The difference between these two fates — between people’s imperfections
canceling each other out versus amplifying each other — is institutions,
the social structures that guide people in their actions. Hollister
seems gifted with an amazing set of institutions. I don’t know the
details, but we can imagine them: Everyone must show up for their shift
an hour early. If you don’t show, a manager calls in a replacement. The
managers keep an eye on your performance and if you don’t do a good
enough job folding shirts, you’re reprimanded or replaced. Perhaps a
roving “brand protection squad” goes around ensuring local managers are
upholding the high national standards. And on and on. Every failsafe has
a failsafe.

If you’ve ever tried building an organization yourself, you know how
hard it is to get something like this right. And yet the world is filled
with organizations that seem to do it effortlessly. This is the paradox
[at the heart of Kafka’s *The
Trial*](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/books2011) and it’s one that
continues to astonish me. How do they do it? And how come no one else is
curious about the details of their success?
