My Life With Tim
================

August 25, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mylifewithtim)

* * * * *

*I wrote this years ago (probably the summer after college), filled with
nostalgia, in a small notebook on a plane to or from Boston. (I finally
understand how people can write books long-form!) I meant to type it in
as soon as I got back and post it here, but I lost it and never got the
chance. While moving recently it turned up again and I thought I should
seize the opportunity to type it in while I still had my hands on it.
(Also, coincidentally, I had lunch today with Tim.)*

*Apologies for the poor writing; I’ve improved a bit in the subsequent
years and it’s rather hard to write well when you’re pouring your
memories into a notebook on a plane.*

In 7th grade we were asked to do a project on the Great Men Who Made
America, or something like that. Other kids chose civil rights leaders
and politicians and even scientists. Then a big tech geek, I chose my
hero, Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the World Wide Web.

One of the first assignments was to do some research and answer a list
of questions provided by the instructor (one of them being “what did
your contemporaries think of you?” — I still wince at not then knowing
what “contemporaries” meant). I was able to answer most of them off the
top of my head and most of the rest from TimBL (as he was universally
called by all but Dave Winer)’s web page. But a few, like “Do you have
any regrets?” were not really answerable form such material. So, with
some trepidation, I sent him an email. His website said not to email him
about school projects on the Web, but I convined myself that school
projects on *him* didn’t qualify. So I carefully composed my email and
sent it out, hoping for the best.

A few days later I received a rather short-tempered reply. “Regrets?” he
said. “I have a few. But then again, too few to mention.” (I didn’t get
the reference until years later when I heard the words again over the
radio — I thought he was just being poetic.) But my favorite answer was
his response to one of the theme questions I asked: “How do you think
your work has shaped America?” or something like that. (I was taking the
assignment a little too literally, I guess.) He shot back with a phrase
that’s stuck with me ever since: “I was an Englishman living in France
and working in Switzerland — it’s got nothing to do with America.” I
proudly reported this back to my teacher, complaining about his
assignment’s Amerocentrism.

The next time I check Tim’s web page, it said not to email him
concerning school projects on the Web or on Tim Berners-Lee.

* * * * *

I didn’t really run into TimBL again until a few years later when I was
visiting Cambridge, Mass., where he worked at MIT. I was working on RSS
at the time with W3C employee Dan Brickly and I felt cocky enough to try
to go see TimBL’s office. I got as far as the nameplate outside his door
when a gruff man with a beard stopped me. “What are you doing?” he
asked. “Seeing Dan Brickley,” I lied. “That’s not Dan’s office,” he
said. “Go wait in the hall. I’ll get Dan,” said the man.

The man, I later learned, was Ralph R. Swick (or RRS), and it always
struck me that he hated me, or at least looked down on me because of my
age. In this encounter he at least could claim to not know who I was,
but even later he would ignore me, ignore what I said, or in one
particular instance, make fun of me. (I’ll get to that later.)

Dan, on the other hand, was glad to see me and took me on a tour of the
W3C, where he and TimBL worked. “Is Tim around?” I asked casully. “Oh
no,” he said, “he’s off in [foreign country].” “Oh,” I said. “But I can
take you to meet our PR director and she can answer any questions you
might have.”

This seemed like an odd move to me. At the time, at least, I was a
co-worker, not a journalist. Still, why not. She gave me the standard
spiel about the W3C, which of course I’d already knew. (Although there
was one funny moment: “The Web is just 10 years old,” she said,
obviously repeating a standard line. “Were you everything you are at 10
years old?” There was an awkward pause as she tried to calculate my age
and realized I might be.)

Eager to show her I knew what I was talking about, I decided to make an
informed criticism of the W3C. Maybe I challenged is corporate control,
or the bylaws’ undemocratic requirements that the Director (TimBL)
approve everything, or maybe that and more. She gave me standard
responses, but I kept pushing and she got increasingly agitated and
eventually started shouting. I wasn’t hurt, and pressed on, but against
my will I started crying (although I imagine it may have looked
intentional — a cheap arguing tactic, perhaps). She offered me tissues
and toned down, asking me to send her some concrete suggestions by email
to consider.

As DanBri took me out, he tried to console me. “Don’t worry,” he said,
“she scares everyone. That’s what makes her so good.” For whatever
reason, she always seemed extra-nice to me after that.

* * * * *

I next ran into TimBL at a W3C conference in Cambridge, where they were
having a meeting on RDF, which I was beginning to get interested in. The
meeting involved a series of presentations on various topics and through
it all, TimBL struck me as incredibly brilliant. He would type away at
his laptop the whole presentation, apparently lost in some project and
not paying attention to anything. Then, towards the end, he would
quickly raise his hand and ask the one question that revealed all the
flaws of the presenter’s assumptions, cutting through everything they
said.

![Me and Tim Berners-Lee](image1_mylifewithtim)

At the end of the meeting, DanBri insisted I meet TimBL and so I went
over to shake his hand. TimBL moved and talked so fast he appeared
almost as a blur, bursting with energy and bouncing around the room.
DanBri took my camera and TimBl slowed down for a moement to grab me
around the shoulder and pose for a picture, a photo which I later used
frequently. (God, I looked so young!)

I met a bunch of other cool people at the meeting — B.K. DeLong, who
introduced me to Tantek (then at Microsoft, he looked for all the world
like a Borg; he later joined Technorati and hounded me incessantly to
take a summer internship there (I was at dinner with him the other nigh
and apparently he still thinks I should!))), libby, and the elusive
mnot. But the one I remember most was Dan Connolly, or DanC as he was
called.

At first, for some reason, I thought he was a kid. He wore a simple
t-shirt and pulled out his guitar during breaks. His enthusiasm was even
greater than TimBL’s and he was clearly just as sharp, although in some
ways more so, since he had a programmer’s logicalness that he applied to
every aspect of his life.

He worked from home in Kansas City, where he lived with his wife and
kids. TO balance work and family, he worked out a contract with his
life, which meant that at 5:00 he would stop whatever he was doing, no
matter how important, for Family Time.

I would follow him around on the RDF chatrooms and could feel myself
growing more logical just by listening to him. When I could I would sort
of apprentice under him, following along and helping as he wrote
programs to do various tasks. I even considered going out to visit him
in Kansas City at one point.

He was an enormous influence, despite his socially conservative politics
(which I always attributed to his location). He was usually quiet about
them, but once he posted a petition in favor of parental abortion
notification laws. At the time I was a radical on children’s rights at
least, and thought parents shouldn’t be notified about anything. He also
mentioned he was trying to figure out why his school *wasn’t* teaching
Intelligent Design (then a new phrase to me), absurdly suggesting he had
to follow the money. It turns out following the money is much better at
finding why people *do* teach Intelligent Design.

Still, I suppose everyone has flaws, and these were relatively minor.
It’s clear why TimBL chose DanC to be his right-hand man, handling the
details for anything important.

* * * * *

The next time I met TimBL was at the WWW2002 conference in Hawaii. DanC
invited me to wake up early for a “Semantic Web Swim” with him and TimBL
but, ashamed of my body at the time, I stupidly declined — a move I
still regret.

One night DanC, some other people, and I went out to a place on the
beach. I, I have to say, didn’t have a sip of alcohol — I still haven’t,
actually — but everyone else got hammered. (I was worried some of them
might walk into the ocean by accident and get swept away.) I left my
participation ambiguous, however, when I posted a short note in an
obscure place on my blog, but John Robb, then-CEO of UserLand Software
(Dave Winer, founder) found it and quoted me on his blog with the
comment “Aaron is 14. Someone should tell his parents.” (No one ever
did, as far as I know.) The next day, when I went to see UserLand
employee Robert Scoble give a talk, I accidentally let my badge in the
hotel room and was dragged out of the talk by security.

On Semantic Web Developer Day, I gave a short presentation about a
project I was working on. Ralph Swick (the gruff fellow, you’ll recall)
also gave a presentation. I got in line to ask him a question, but I was
last and we were out of time. “It’ll be quick,” I lied. “OK, they said.
“Have you thought at all about the privacy implications of this?” I
asked (for his software was a total privacy nightmare). “Yes,” RRS
responded and everybody laughed. I went back t the audience feeling like
a jerk and RRS ignored me when I tried to ask him to elaborate
one-on-one.

It was in the hallway one day that I first really talked to TimBL. He
was breezing down the corridor when he spotted me and ran up. “Aaron!”
he said. “I really appreciate all the work you[‘re doing — it’s great
stuff. Do you think maybe you could help with a little project?]”
Flustered, I said of course. He outlined a project having to do with
encrypted RDF and I eagerly volunteered, amazed at my good fortune.

A few days later, at a conference dinner, I got my food and was looking
for a place to sit, when TimBL came by. “Here,” he said, “I think I’ve
got a place for you” and he brought me over to the W3C table, seating me
directly across from him, which was simply amazing. The table was full
of good cheer and Tim commemorated the moment by passing his camera
around it and asking everyone to take a photo from their point of view.

I last saw him as we were leaving when he pulled my mom aside and
introduced himself. “Aaron’s doing great work,” he said, “but I’m a
little worried. The other night at dinner all he had was rice.” “Oh,
he’s just a fussy eater,” my mom explained.

* * * * *

The last time my path crossed with TimBL is when I was applying for
Stanford. My Dad happened to be in Cambridge at the time and insisted on
asking TimBL for a letter of recommendation, by going over to TimBL’s
office. Apparently he had better luck than I, since I’m told TimBL
agreed and I was later accepted to Stanford. I guess a letter of
recommendation from the creator of the Web counts for something, even if
he is an Englishman.

[image1_mylifewithtim]: image1_mylifewithtim.jpg