Tim DeLaughter and the Boundary of Spectacle
============================================

September 18, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/spree)

* * * * *

The traditional symphony is a highly formal event. Musicians, in formal
clothes, sit in a carefully-designed arrangement high above the audience
who (also usually in formal clothes) sits in seats and applauds at
formally-appropriate moments (recall the odd paradox of most of the
audience unsure when to clap; is it the end of the piece or just the end
of the movement?). The music performed is also often formal, classical
music, like fine art generally, typically signifying something a cut
above everyday life.

This is challenged somewhat by things like the Boston Pops, a symphony
who, for the 4th of July, performed “Sweet Caroline” with Neil Diamond
to a crowd of people sitting on towels on the lawn waving flags. But,
even so, the main feeling was of people crowding around to see something
spectacular — *look, it’s Neil Diamond!*

The sense was rather different when, wandering past techs and grips, Tim
DeLaughter, wearing the dingiest of street clothes, climbed over a
forest of cables to the microphone and begun talking about how his
father used to beat him for imitating Neil Diamond. *Look, it’s him!*
was thoroughly tempered with *Who is this guy?*

“So, you know, I would say things like *(Neil Diamond voice:) Please
pass the potatoes! I’m so very hungry!* [pats his stomach] and he’d say
*Don’t you dare do that again* and bitchslap me [mimes bitchslapping]
and of course I’d do it again and again.”

And so the audience was throughly puzzled by the time he, rather
casually, dropped in the line “Let me bring out the band” and the couple
dozen members wandered out onto the stage, also in street clothes. But
soon the lights faded and Tim grabbed the microphone and in a burst of
light and music, they launched into a rousing version of “Sweet
Caroline.”

Tim pranced on stage like no one you’ve ever seen and the audience
bounced up and down and sung along with enthusiasm, but in a throughly
confused manner. No one was quite sure how seriously to take a
disheveled-looking bunch of dancers, violinists, trumpeters, and
harpists led by a guy in street clothes prancing around doing his best
imitation of Neil Diamond. (Although, God, nothing can top the chorus
girls flicking their hair in tune with “Live and Let Die.”)

A rock band is a special kind of spectacle all on its own — think of
Beatlesmania, for example, or how “rock star” is a generalized term for
a special kind of awe-inspiring celebrity — and Tim did everything he
could to both heighten this sense and demolish it. They’d launch into
furious imposing rock songs and the audience would scream and reach
toward them, but then the rock would fade down into a quieter symphonic
bridge section and Tim would sit down on the stage and chat casually
with someone in the front row, while still playing the bridge’s main
repeating theme on his guitar.

All the usual audience-musician relations were subverted. Musicians
often point their mic at the crowd to inspire them to scream the key
line in a chorus. Tim, in the middle of a verse, would bend down and
point the microphone in a fan’s face and let them sing it. And while
some musicians “bodysurf” on the crowd’s hands, while he sang about
being “under the ocean”, Tim literally lay down on the beer-drenched
sticky floor and crawled between their legs.

The tension was only heightened in the second act, when the band
appeared in their famous white robes, but approached the stage by
walking through the audience, saying hi to everyone and hugging like old
friends. Tim frequently jumped down into the audience and hugged people
in the middle of singing, the microphone in one hand reaching around
their back to meet his face on the other side.

The fundamental tension of celebrity is appearing to the world as
someone superhuman — achiever of great deeds, seen only in airbrushed
photos and on giant screens, known by vastly more people than they
themselves know — while still, at base, being a human like everyone
else, the kind of person who goes down the street to get a sandwich and
chats with people on the subway and all the other humdrum pieces of
daily life. It’s an odd contradiction and never have I seen it presented
better than watching the Polyphonic Spree on stage last night.
