Election Slate: February 2008
=============================

February 4, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/election0208)

* * * * *

Being a newly-minted California voter, I’ve been looking forward to my
opportunity to exercise a little direct democracy tomorrow. (I’m not
taking a position on whether direct democracy is a good idea, but surely
if it’s there one might as well take advantage of it.) I encourage you
to vote as well; indeed, I encourage you to vote the same way I do:

**Presidential Candidate for the Democratic Party:** Barack Obama.
Between Mike Gravel’s inability to get more attention than a passing
mention from Wikipedia and everybody else dropping out, the choice is
apparently down to Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Hillary is the kind
of sellout DLC centrist who [cozies up to Rupert
Murdoch](http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/05/09/politics/main1600694.shtml);
Barack Obama can hardly be worse. Still, [he’s sold out
too](http://www.harpers.org/archive/2006/10/sb-a-little-bit-more-on-obama-1161881683)
and I vote for him under the illusion that he’ll somehow revert to his
community organizing, Iraq War-opposing, progressive old pre-sellout
self sometime before becoming President. False hope springs eternal.

**Proposition 91:** No. So bad, even its supporters are asking you to
vote against it.

**Proposition 92:** Yes. Community college is important and previous
propositions have been screwing it over for years.

**Proposition 93:** Yes. Progressives seem to oppose term limits, on the
grounds that they “shift[] more power to the governor and ensur[e] that
the State Assembly and the State Senate will be filled with people who
lack the experience and institutional history to fight the Sacramento
lobbyists (who, of course, have no term limits)”
([SFBG](http://www.sfbg.com/entry.php?entry_id=5430&volume_id=317&issue_id=335&volume_num=42&issue_num=16&l=1)).
I’m not so sure, but this seems like a fairly modest proposal which
seems to strike a reasonable balance.

**Propositions 94-97:** No. The only people in favor of expanding the
casinos while reducing their oversight seem to be their lobbyists.

**Proposition A:** Yes. Parks are nice.

**Proposition B:** Yes. Everyone seems to support this and if police
officers want to work three more years, who am I to say no?

**Proposition C:** Yes. I know rationally this is an absurd proposal,
but when you’re there, in the privacy of the voting booth, looking at
whether a geodesic dome should be built on Alcatraz Island, who’s going
to stop you from voting yes?
