Solidarity for the Shy: Achieving Critical Mass
===============================================

August 8, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/critmass)

* * * * *

The idea is simple: once a month, people meet up in the center of the
city with their bikes and then go on a ride through the city together,
taking over the streets through sheer numbers. There’s little explicit
politics — with the exception of a distaste for “car culture” — and no
leaders or official organizers. The whole thing, the (unofficial)
website explains, is a “xerocracy”: pass out xeroxes of your proposal
and maybe people will follow it. Sounds like fun.

I finally got myself together enough to go this month and, half an hour
before starting time, hopped on my bike and headed over. Unfortunately I
didn’t look at the directions all that carefully and ended up getting
lost in Boston. At one point I made a wrong turn and found myself
trapped in the middle of a major highway, facing the wrong direction,
and with little opportunity to make it to the side. Somehow, though, I
managed to escape.

I got lost several more times and became increasingly frustrated with
Boston’s loopy street plan. Forget about being bike-friendly, this city
isn’t even car-friendly. As I repeatedly reversed my path, I figured I
had no doubt missed the event. Just as well, I figured, since my leg
muscles were aching from a heavy day of running yesterday and the sky
was so cloudy that rain seemed inevitable. Still, I figured, I should at
least try to find the location of the meetup for next time.

I made sure to bring nothing with me save the key to my apartment (both
for aerodynamism and in case I got arrested — in New York, the police
have been known to harass and arrest CMers for “parading without a
permit”) so I don’t know what time I arrived, but I do know how my face
lit up when I saw the mass of bicycles and cyclists arranged at the
park, even as the wind was trying to blow me over.

The park was a small right triangle,taking up less than half the block.
On one side was a farmer’s market, closing up shop for the day. On the
other was a small protest about Israel’s invasion of Lebanon, with many
waving Lebanese flags and a speaker on a podium (whose voice was
amplified by portable radios his associates carried around the crowd)
discussed the tragedy of the invasion. A fat balding man waved a sign
reading “Moderate Muslims: Help US Fight Islamonazism”, but things were
otherwise quite civil.

Finally, on the hypotenuse, were the cyclists, just standing and
chatting. By the time I’d made my way over to them, I noticed they were
biking around in a circle together, so I joined in, smiling at the
sight. We all biked around for a while until someone shouted “Mike, go
right!” Mike did, exiting onto the street, and the crowd followed.

For the most part, I tried to stay in the middle of the pack. Bikes rode
on all sides of me, while cars were stopped in their tracks. Frustrated,
many of them pounded on their horns. In response, the crowd imitated
their honk, except shouting “woohoo” as the noise, as if the cars were
cheering them on.

We were particularly amused at the sight of a duck tour stopped in its
tracks. I didn’t catch what happened next, but from what I heard, the
duck tour tried to break into the mass and ended up running right into
the car next to it, greatly amusing all the massers.

Before we started, I overheard someone discussing about how last time a
car tried to break into the mass as it was passing by. He said this no
so much in anger but rather in amazement at the audacity of the idea. If
the mass had any opinions, it definitely felt that the street was
rightly its.

To protect against future such incursions, a couple people with long
bikes stood in front of cars at intersections, acting as human
barricades, then sprinting back to the front of the mass so they could
do it again. At one intersection, they even tried to placate the cars.
“Oh, don’t worry, we” just be a second, just hold on one sec,” they
shouted too the cars, which the mass found hilarious.

It was probably just as well the cars stayed put. Once one managed to
break into it the mass, but quickly found itself stymied, like a
bewildered bear suddenly finding itself in the middle of a swarm of
honeybees.

When cars asked what we were all doing, we responded that we’d simply
decided to go out for a bike ride. When pedestrians asked, however, we
shouted “Critical Mass!” Still, despite our vehiclism, some cars did
explicitly shout their support for Critical Mass.

Throughout I’ve been referring to the mass as a single entity, but it
didn’t really feel like one. While there certainly were a lot of bikes,
and together we formed quite an imposing swarm, but despite engaging it
a coordinated activity, we related mostly as individuals, most people
just talking to the friends they’d come with. For the most part, there
just wasn’t much to talk about. I was riding my weirdo bike, so a lot of
people said something like “sweet bike”, but the conversation didn’t go
far beyond “did you build it?” Bikes were, perhaps, the only thing we
had in common. And even casual smalltalk seems exceedingly awkward in
such a situation. American education, it has been said, is about
learning how to be alone in a crowd. Perhaps its not surprising then
that it also teaches how to be alone at a mass protest.

The group, however, did make some attempt at community. When some began
falling behind, they’d shout “mass up!” encouraging the others to slow
down and catch up with the group. But this was more an issue of
practicality than community, though, as a dispersed mass had less
effect.

We winded around the city of Boston for a while. Cambridge is some
complex and entertaining, and I’m such a loner and stay-insider, that I
rarely find myself across the river in Boston. That’s probably a shame,
because from what I see of it, the city’s quite nice. I suppose I must
have been in the North End, which I gather is the nice neighborhood, but
I didn’t realize how much so. The streets turned into long promenades
upon which men in dashing suits would dash and attractive women walked
their dogs. The houses were intricate constructions of brick and, from
the outside at least, appeared exceedingly elegant. The whole scene
reminded me of the expensive parts of Manhattan. A fancy shopping
district was just blocks away.

After touring this part of the city, with so many twists and turns that
I completely lost track of where we were, we turned up at the bridge to
MIT. Storm clouds provided a backdrop to the horizon and as we crossed
we saw bolt of lightning come down from the clouds and connect with some
tall building. I wasn’t thrilled about getting my bike wet, but I
figured that as long as we were heading in the direction of my
apartment, I might as well continue on.

We rode up Mass Ave, Cambridge’s main street, past a noticeably
friendlier crowd of passersby. By the time we’d gotten half-way to
Harvard Square though, the rain started coming down, very quickly
accelerating to full sheets and then to buckets. The wind was blowing so
hard that the rain drops attacked my face like darts, making my eyes
sting. Even when I put my hand above my eyes for protection, they
managed to work their way around it and straight into my eyeballs. In
short order, I quickly became soaked through and through. It was a good
thing I brought nothing save those keys.

The massers, for the most part, embraced the rain, throwing their hands
in the air and cheering. And, since I had nothing to worry about getting
wet (except the bike, which had already been left out in the rain one
too many times), I did the same. It was liberating.

As we passed Harvard Square, the rain started pouring down even harder,
flooding the streets with water in which our bikes left beautiful
trails. We headed into a tunnel, screaming the entire length. Then we
stopped at the firehouse at the end, waiting for the rest to catch up,
until someone shouted “let’s go again!” and we headed back into the
tunnel in the other direction, again screaming. It was this point that
we began to turn around and head back to Boston, though by a circuitous
route I’d never seen before and didn’t quite understand. As we turned
away from my apartment, I thought about taking this chance to make my
exit and head home, but somehow riding home alone seemed more dangerous
that continuing on inside the protective bubble of the mass. So I
continued. The rain quickly died down, to the annoyance of some riders.
‘That’s all you got?’ one shouted. ‘Come on!’

By the time we got back to the bridge to Boston, I was feeling kind of
tired and couldn’t quite force myself to make it all the way up and, in
any event, wasn’t quite sure whether I should continue on with everyone.
The group had thinned significantly by this point, with people
presumably peeling off as we passed their houses. I decided to save the
full tour for another time and turned around to head back home.

Despite being physically tired and thoroughly soaked, I was exhilarated.
It was the most fun I’d ever had on a bicycle, despite its oddities and
flaws. I couldn’t wait to tell my friends.

As I rode home, I apparently committed some traffic error, leading some
jerk in a car to shout ‘Get the fuck off the road, you ass!’ It didn’t
faze me at all, though. ‘Get the fuck off *my* road,’ I thought.
