Writing a Book: Part One (Ambition)
===================================

July 27, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bookwriting1)

* * * * *

So I’m writing a book. In some sense, this is nothing new. I’ve wanted
to write a book since I was probably five and since then I must have
started seriously writing drafts of half a dozen, before abandoning
them. But this one feels different somehow. I really think I’m going to
finish it.

I don’t want to say what it’s about publicly yet (hint: it has to do
with politics), but it’s ambitious — perhaps ridiculously so; when I
tell people at parties about it they look at me as if trying to
determine whether I’ve gone mad. My goals for it are ambitious too: I
want it to be popular (how hard is it to be a ‘national bestseller’?), I
want it to be great writing (accurate, nuanced, and hard-to-put-down),
and I want it to make a difference (get people organized, change
government policy). Oh, come on. Now *you’re* giving me that look.

I suppose most authors want these things, but it doesn’t seem like they
try particularly hard. And in a way that’s understandable: writing 300
coherent pages is hard enough — why add all these additional
requirements? But I have high standards for books. (I’m almost always
disappointed.) I figure the least I can do is try my best to live up to
them myself.

Just as I’ve always wanted to write a book, I’ve always wondered how you
write one. The problem is that the kind of people who would write books
on how they write books are usually pretty dreadful writers and I can’t
stand their poor writing, let alone their sense of superiority. (This is
why I kept throwing *On Writing Well* against the wall.) But I’ve never
written a book before, so I don’t feel superior, and I’m at least trying
to be a great writer. So for people in the same boat, I thought I’d
write about what it’s like.

* * * * *

It started with an email. I’d written a blog post on management that had
gotten some attention, including a link from the famed Jason Kottke.
Apparently the New York literati all read Jason’s blog, because an
editor at a publishing house followed the link and read my piece and
thought it might make a decent book. He worked for the business book
imprint of a major-name publisher and invited me to give him a call and
discuss the idea further.

Normally when I come up with book ideas, I don’t tell more than a couple
people about them. I’ve certainly never talked to anyone at a major-name
publisher before. So getting this email was thrilling. I’d always
imagined I’d have to pitch my book to publishers someday, but now
publishers were coming to *me*, and asking for a book! It gave the whole
thing a seriousness those other book projects lacked.

I told him I was heading to New York soon and he invited me to lunch at
the Knickerbocker. It was the kind of place you imagine New York
businesspeople meet for lunch: guys in suits, wood-paneled walls, I
think I might have even spotted a cigar.

The editor was very excited and encouraging, but as we talked I grew
increasingly discouraged. I began to remember how much I hate business
books with a passion, how ridiculously dumb and faddish they are. For
his part, the editor complained about how the rest of the world didn’t
take business books seriously. They sold ten times better than normal
books, he said, but the *New York Times* refuses to list any of them on
their prestigious nonfiction bestseller list (there’s a special section
just for business bestsellers that’s only published monthly and buried
away).

Furthermore, the books are apparently sold in the most degrading ways —
motivational talks at the Learning Annex were mentioned. I’d always
imagined myself as more of a *Charlie Rose* guy. I wanted to write a
bestseller, it was true, but mostly for the respect, not the money. For
the people I hang out with, I suspect writing a bestselling business
book would bring me only ridicule.

Afterward I met with a prominent book agent that my friend introduced me
to — apparently one of the town’s top ten. She was brilliant and
enthusiastic and full of energy. Spending an hour batting around ideas
with her was lots of fun. Her shelves were lined with the famous books
her authors had published and I began to dream about a future among
those names.

But that was just the intro, for the details she handed me off to an
associate, who explained the next step was to turn my idea into a rough
outline. So I went back to where I was staying and tried to do just
that. But I just couldn’t. I went for walks, I pounded my head against
the desk, I tried moving words around on the screen, but I couldn’t seem
to find a way to make the business book idea make sense. The fundamental
problem was simple: who would take business advice from a teenager?

As I was working on it, another idea (we’ll call it the politics book)
began nagging at the back of my head. I tried not to think of it, but it
wouldn’t go away. The more I told it to bug off, the louder it nagged.
Finally, I decided I would get the business book out of the way quickly
and then do the politics one. But as my idea for the business book fell
apart in my hands, the plan for the politics book grew clearer and
clearer. I began talking about it, getting excited about it, even doing
a whole outline for it. It seemed so perfect, so *right*. Finally, my
girlfriend asked why I didn’t just do that book instead.

The associate agent was tepid (I guess politics books don’t sell as
well), but intrigued enough to suggest I pursue it. He said the next
step was to work on expanding my description of the introduction. And
somehow I got it in my head that the best way to do this would be to
just try and write it.

Which meant I needed to figure out how to write.
