Blogs I Would Like to Read
==========================

November 25, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/blogs2make)

* * * * *

(in no particular order)

**The Wonk Wing:** Thoughtful exploration of important policy issues by
decent writers who are clearly fascinated by their subject. Not only
would you get a first-class education in the relevant issues around
health care, global warming, urban sprawl, zoning, traffic, sewage, etc.
but you’d have fun while doing it. Think [Ezra
Klein](http://ezraklein.com/) for more than just health care. Think [The
Wonk Room](http://wonkroom.thinkprogress.org/) but more Sorkin and less
Pennebaker. (Sorry, Wonk Room!)

**Perfect Devices:** Coverage of things which are simply the
best-in-the-world at what they do, and the stories of how they got
there. I want stories from the people who calibrate bathroom-mirror
lighting to be the perfect combination of brightness and diffusion “so
that it’s diagnostically acute without being brutal” (ASFTINDA, 302). I
want stories about the kitchen at *French Laundry* and *Alinea*. I want
the start-to-finish story of HF&J designing a typeface. (Yes, I’m
eagerly awaiting *[Objectified](http://www.objectifiedfilm.com/)*.)

**17th and Pennsylvania:** This is the address of the Starbucks outside
the White House, where apparently executive branch officials regularly
grab coffee, chat, and meet with a wide variety of famous-for-DC types.
Why doesn’t an enterprising Gawker Stalker simply sit there and write
down what happens?

**This Academic Life:** Stories of new papers and research results — not
just a summary of the work itself, but the story of how it fits into the
field’s debates, the personal intrigues of the players, the implications
for the wider world. Basically, *Lingua Fraca* returning as a blog.

**Evisceration Quarterly:** A daily selection of the finest in insults,
takedowns, and general argumentative
[evisceration](http://delicious.com/tag/evisceration). The motto:
teaching you how to think by showing you how not to. And, to not be
entirely negative, the occasional model of clarity. With special
blogging consultant, Brad DeLong.
