Blame the Terrorist Black Muslims
=================================

October 15, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/blameblacks)

* * * * *

As John McCain sinks in the polls, it’s been amazing to watch one of
America’s two major parties adopt wholesale an insane racist conspiracy
theory and to watch the mainstream media lap it up. Back when
Republicans were insisting that the Clintons ran an underground
drug-smuggling ring and murdering their political opponents, you at
least had to send away for the video. Now it’s broadcast 24-hours-a-day
on CNN and Fox.

The claims, outlined in [this seizure-inducing Web
ad](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rk5aM5wP25M) (since deleted from
McCain’s site), are basically that Barack Obama, left-wing terrorists,
and inner-city blacks have teamed up to cause the mortgage meltdown and
commit voter fraud to ensure Obama wins the election. Yes, in an era
when huge banks are failing left and right and the Republican is down 14
points in the polls, Republicans are convinced that poor
African-Americans must be responsible. If only!

It’s all blatant lies, of course, but it’s really been incredible to
watch the Republicans be forced into such lunacy. And, of course, it’s
undoubtedly setting the stage for more repression and violence against
powerless blacks. And ACORN, one of the few organizations that actually
helps these communities, is just being shredded by the media because of
these false allegations. Of course, it’s also a cover for ongoing
attempts at voter intimidation and other sleazy tactics to steal the
election.

There’s a lot of confusion about what happened, so let me explain it
simply: as the dot-com bubble was bursting, Alan Greenspan looked for a
new place to park all that cash. And the answer was houses. It was a
dot-com bubble repeat in slow-motion. Prices rose and rose, people
started withdrawing [hundreds of thousands of dollars in
equity](http://www.irvinehousingblog.com/blog/comments/generation-pwned/)
from their house, “experts” on CNBC (like
[David](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0385514344.01.LZZZZZZZ.jpg)
[Lereah](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0385514352.01.LZZZZZZZ.jpg))
said that housing prices would always go up, brokers started issuing
mortgages to everyone with a pulse, everyone began buying and flipping
homes.

The mortgages were sold to upstream firms, among them Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, which conservatives had insisted on privatizing to let the
market’s magic work. The upstream firms packaged them into securities to
sell to the big pile of money and then all bought insurance on each
other to ensure that if one failed the whole thing would come crashing
down. (Conservatives refused to regulate the insurance market — the
government isn’t smarter than these big banks, they said.)

Fail it did, as soon as the housing bubble burst and housing prices
returned to their normal levels. This meant the new mortgages weren’t
worth paying back, meaning the mortgage-backed securities were
worthless, meaning it was time to collect on the insurance, meaning the
whole system came crashing down. And thus, the bailout.

You can see why conservatives might prefer to blame it all on blacks.

These tactics infuriate me. I don’t know how to stop them, but I will do
my small part by [donating to ACORN](http://www.acorn.org/?12344). I
hope you’ll join me.
