Understanding Groupon Means Understanding ACSOI
===============================================

August 18, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/acsoi)

* * * * *

Imagine you started a business that delivered people a box of cereal
each week. Each week they pay you, you take their money and buy a box of
cereal and some shipping, and keep what’s left over. You learn that the
average new customer brings in \$50 in profit over their lifetime, so
you decide to spend some of that money to get new customers — say, by
buying [web ads](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/adlogic).

With web ads, you can say exactly how much you want to spend for each
new customer. Now the future isn’t necessarily like the past — things
could go wrong — but it seems safe to, say, spend \$5 to get a new
customer. If the future is like the past, you’ll make \$45 each time you
do this. And even if future customers are only half as good as current
ones, you’ll still be making \$20 each time you do this!

How much money should you spend on marketing? Well, others have started
to notice you making money hand-over-fist and have decided to start
competing. Best to get people hooked on your service than on theirs,
right? And each dollar you spend now is going to bring in ten times
later, so it’d be crazy not to spend everything you could, right? You’re
only making \$10 million a year right now o you get your investors to
put in another \$100 million and quickly spend it all on marketing.

Now by traditional accounting standards, you’re \$90 million in the red.
But that seems like a misleading way to count. After all, if you stopped
marketing tomorrow you’d have a nice, profitable \$10 million a year
business. Instead it makes sense to look at the \$10 million dollars a
year you’re making on the one hand and your aggressive expansion plan
(in particular, how much it costs to get a new customer and the lifetime
value expected from a new customer) on the other.

This, as best as I can tell, was the story of Groupon. They called that
first number (the business you have now, aside from the expansion
attempt) ACSOI.

But the press didn’t seem to understand any of this. Groupon was
pilloried for playing accounting games that turned a huge loss into a
moderate profit. And when, in response, Groupon took the ACSOI numbers
out of their prospectus, it was hailed as a victory over fraudulent
accounting.

Which all strikes me as ridiculous. Groupon didn’t hide the fact that
they were losing money by traditional accounting standards. They said so
up front, but then provided the additional data that they use
internally. Just some additional information, no pressure: “While we
track this management metric internally to gauge our performance, we
encourage you to base your investment decision on whatever metrics make
you comfortable,” they said. How does taking this information out of the
prospectus help anyone?

Now there are valid questions about this model. Perhaps the future won’t
be like the past, perhaps Groupon’s cost-per-acquisition is way too
high, perhaps trying to grow so fast is risky. Or maybe Groupon is
presenting misleading ACSOI numbers and even if they stopped all
marketing today they’d still be losing money. I’d genuinely like to
know. But the discussion needs to start with understanding what they’re
saying, not just pretending they’re making stuff up.
