What It Means To Be An Intellectual
===================================

April 17, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intellectuals)

* * * * *

A friend sent me an email this morning and at the end of it, almost as
an afterthought, he responded to a quote I’d sent him from an author
praising books. “He would say that,” my friend replied, “he’s a writer.”

I want to quibble with this statement — how is it that we can dismiss
someone’s argument simply because of their job? — but doing so would
seem bizarre. There’s a social norm that how much we discuss something
should be roughly proportional to its importance. Mountains of print may
be spilled on the issues of international relations but spending a
couple emails [discussing
punctuation](http://daringfireball.net/2003/03/antialiasing) would seem
dreadfully bizarre.

There’s just one problem: I *enjoy* deep discussions of punctuation and
other trivialities. I could try to justify this taste — some argument
that we should think about everything we do so that we don’t do
everything we think about — but why bother? Do I have to justify
enjoying certain television shows as well? At some point, isn’t pure
enjoyment just enough? After all, [time isn’t
fungible](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity).

But of course, the same drive that leads me to question punctuation
leads me to question the drive itself, and thus this essay.

What is “this drive”? It’s the tendency to not simply accept things as
they are but to want to think about them, to understand them. To not be
content to simply feel sad but [to ask what sadness
means](http://www.plover.com/blog/aliens/emotions.html). To not just get
a bus pass but [to think about the economic reasons getting a bus pass
makes
sense](http://vitanuova.loyalty.org/weblog/nb.cgi/view/vitanuova/2005/11/04/0).
I call this tendency the intellectual.

The word “intellectual” has a bit of a bad rap. When I think of the word
I hear a man with a southern accent sneering at it. But this stain seems
appropriate — *the idea* has a bad rap.

And why is that? One reason is that many people simply don’t like to
think about things. Perhaps it reminds them of school, which they didn’t
enjoy, and they don’t want to go back there. Another is that they’re
busy people — men of action — and they don’t have time to sit and think
about every little detail. But mostly it’s just because they think it’s
a waste of time. What’s the point? What difference does it make what you
think about punctuation? It’s not going to affect anything.

This is the argument that’s often used when demonizing intellectuals. As
Thomas Frank summarizes the argument:

> The same bunch of sneaking intellectuals are responsible for the
> content of Hollywood movies and for the income tax, by which they
> steal from the rest of us. They do no useful work, producing nothing
> but movies and newspaper columns while they freeload on the labor of
> others. (116)

When I think of intellectuals, though, I don’t really think of Hollywood
producers or politicians or even newspaper columnists. But the people I
do think of seem to have something else in common. They don’t just love
thinking, they love language. They love its tricks and intricacies, its
games, the way it gets written down, the books it gets written into, the
libraries those books are in, and the typography those books use.

Upon reflection this makes perfect sense. Language is the medium of
thought and so it’s no surprise that someone who spends a lot of time
thinking spends a lot of time thinking about how to communicate their
thoughts as well. And indeed, all the intellectuals that come to mind
write, not because they have to or get paid to, but simply for its own
sake. What good is thinking if you can’t share?

This contrasts with how intellectuals are commonly thought of — namely
as pretentious elitist snobs. But real intellectuals, at least in the
sense I’m using the term, are anything but. They love nothing more than
explaining their ideas so that anyone who’s interested can understand
them. They only seem pretentious because discussing such things is so
bizarre.

This stereotype actually seems more like the caricature of the academic
than the intellectual. (It’s perhaps worth noting that most of the
intellectuals I can think of *aren’t* academics or at least have left
the academy.) Far from being intellectuals, academics are encouraged to
be almost the opposite. Instead of trying to explain things simply,
they’re rewarded for making them seem more complicated. Instead of
trying to learn about everything, they’re forced to focus in on their
little subdiscipline. Instead of loving books, they have to love gabbing
— up in front of class or at office hour with students or at
professional conferences or faculty meetings.

Not that there’s anything wrong with that. At the beginning I declined
to justify my being an intellectual on any grounds other than pure
personal enjoyment. And here, at the end, I can’t think of any better
justification. Certainly people should think deeply about their actions
and the world’s problems and other important topics. But the other ones?
That’s little more than personal preference.
