The Logic of Loss
=================

April 13, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/logicofloss)

* * * * *

Imagine someone offered you a 1% chance of winning a million dollars.
How much would you pay for it? The natural inclination would be to say
you break even at 1% of a million, which is \$10,000. Even if you could
scrape together the cash, this doesn’t seem like a very good deal. After
all, there’s a 99% chance that you’ll have just thrown away ten grand.

Where did we go wrong? The problem is that calculating the average value
this way only makes sense if you get to take the deal enough times to
expect an average result. If you bought a couple thousand of these
chances at \$9000 each, then you might start to come out ahead. But
buying just one doesn’t seem very bright.

Of course, the same logic applies to more pedestrian examples of risk.
It probably doesn’t make sense to invest in just one startup, even if
the returns on startups are huge. That’s why VCs invest in large numbers
of startups; the returns from the wins balance out the flops.

This should seem pretty obvious, but some people seem to forget it a
lot. Take the St. Petersburg paradox. Imagine this game: A dollar is
placed on the table and a coin is flipped. If the coin comes up heads,
the money is doubled and the coin is flipped again. Tails, the game ends
and you take the money. How much would you pay to play?

The paradox comes about because the naive answer here is infinite.
There’s a 50% chance you get a dollar (=fifty cents), a 25% chance you
get 2 (another fifty cents), a 12.5% chance you get 4 (again), and so on
infinitely. But, naturally, it seems insane to pay a fortune to play
this game. Thus the paradox.

Folks seem to be genuinely stumped about this, but it’s just the first
offer taken to the limit: instead of a 1% chance of making a million,
you have an infinitesimal chance of making an infinity. If you got to
play the game an infinite number of times, shelling out cash might begin
to make sense, but if you only play it once it’s not worth much.

Keep that in mind next time someone offers you a game.
