A Trip to the Courthouse: Part 1
================================

November 27, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport)

* * * * *

The United State Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit is a
federal-looking building nestled in among the offices and shops and
business parks of San Francisco’s downtown. Large marble walls and
staircases try desperately to send the message that what goes on here is
of paramount importance, that the decisions made in these halls will
reverberate throughout a large part of the country: Alaska, Arizona,
California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, and Washington — the
largest of any appeals court.

But, this morning, the courtroom tells a different story. With people
packed like Sardines into a room not much bigger than a bedroom in a San
Francisco apartment, with one of the judges missing and replaced —
without explanation — with a large television, and with hesitant,
stammering public defenders arguing their cases against only
slightly-less-hesitant civil servants, I briefly wondered if I was in
the wrong room.

The first case I saw appeared to be a man requesting asylum in the US
from his home country. I missed large portions of the case, but as I
paid attention, the facts started coming out. He wanted asylum from
persecution because he was gay. But the country he was hiding from
didn’t exactly have a record of persecution of gays. And the only
evidence of persecution he could point to was that a couple people on
the street once called him gay.

The next case seemed a little better for the non-government guy. It was
about a man who accused of defrauding Medicare by double-billing. He
noted that the Court had changed the law during the case; instead of
just requiring the jury to find *whether* double-billing had occurred,
it now required the jury to find how much. But they’d made that change
after the trial, so he’d never had a chance to present any evidence on
how much double-billing had occurred. His lawyer asked for a chance to
hold a hearing to present the evidence.

“Do you have the evidence?” a judge asked. The lawyer responded that he
didn’t, because he was a public defender and needed to hire a
professional accountant to look through the math, but couldn’t afford to
without a judge’s permission, and the judge denied his request at the
same time he denied the hearing on the subject. But, he explained, the
government’s accountant had admitted on the stand that there were
mistakes in the math he presented, although he didn’t know what impact
they had. Couldn’t he just get a trial to assess the math? The judges
didn’t seem to think so.

If the judges weren’t going to give a victory on that case, they really
weren’t on the next one. A man who lived with his mom in Massachusetts
was challenging the government’s search of his storage locker in
Arizona. His lawyer sparred with the judges for some time about the
details of Fourth Amendment law. Then the government’s lawyer took the
stage. “Let me tell you about this man,” he said. “As a condition of his
parole, he wasn’t permitted to have any guns. But he kept one gun, the
machine gun he’d had since he was a kid — he called it his baby. The
government got a tip and showed up on his doorstep and he practically
handed them the gun and then told them to go away. It was raining
outside and he wouldn’t let them into his house. They searched the house
and found another machine gun kit.”

“In Court, he was asked if he had any more guns. His lawyer, acting on
his client’s behalf, insisted that the Court didn’t have jurisdiction
because all the other guns were in a storage locker in Arizona. After
the lawyer said that, we had to search the locker in Arizona. There we
found a huge shipping crate. To take the crate into evidence, the
government had to inventory it. There we found 44 flamethrowers, 22
submachine guns, 5 hand grenades, and a handful of pistols. We had to
call in the bomb squad and check over everything. And he’s arguing that
the Fourth Amendment doesn’t permit us to open that crate.”

Later, I heard some of the lawyers on a different case joking. “Once
opposing counsel says flamethrowers, you’ve lost. Doesn’t matter how
good your case is. You’re never going to recover from that.”

It was into this environment that Larry Lessig stepped. Lessig has been
thinking about the implications of copyright law for most of his career.
He has spent months practicing to argue before the Supreme Court and
other lesser courts. He spent the weekend practicing this case with
other faculty members at the Stanford Law School. He spent the morning
pacing the halls, going over his notes one last time. And as he strode
into the Courtroom that morning and begun his argument before the Court,
unlike every other lawyer who had presented, he didn’t stumble over a
single word.

In some ways, this should have been home territory for Lessig. It was
his own Court, right in his own town of San Francisco. And as he paced
the halls, he was continually interrupted by former students of his at
Stanford Law, who had gone on to careers as lawyers in the area, which
had brought them here, to argue before the Court just like him. And,
perhaps he figured, the judges would welcome a break from the endless
parade of petty complaints to his arguments about the big issues — the
First Amendment, the Progress clause, copyright. Weren’t things like
that why they became judges in the first place?

Perhaps not.

*[continued in part 2](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/kahlereport2)*
