Disinfecting the Sunlight Foundation
====================================

November 20, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/dissunlight)

* * * * *

For years, [Mike Klein](http://www.mikeklein.com/) was a big-time [D.C.
corporate lawyer](http://www.wilmerhale.com/michael_klein/). He’d made
millions starting a string of companies, including [an air cargo
carrier](http://www.astaraircargo.us/), [a D.C.
restaurant](http://www.leparadou.net/), [a D.C. art
gallery](http://www.zenithgallery.com/), and [a real estate information
database](http://www.costargroup.com/). But then Klein’s son, aghast at
the horrors of his government under Bush II, fled the country. Or, as
Klein put it in [an interview with the Harvard Law School Alumni
Bulletin](http://www.law.harvard.edu/alumni/bulletin/2006/spring/closing.php),
“My two sons led me to realize that a significant part of their
generation thinks democracy isn’t worth engagement or even respect. For
an old 1960s activist like myself, that was the tipping point.”

It’s natural for a father to want to fix things for his sons (and
perhaps for a wealthy D.C. lawyer to feel a bit guilty about it as
well), so Klein, leaning a bit more on his corporate millions than his
sixties activism, started a foundation. Taking its name from Justice
Brandeis’s famed comment that “Sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants”, the [Sunlight
Foundation](http://www.opensecrets.org/pressreleases/2003/SpeakingFreely.asp)
was formed to promote transparency and accountability in American
government.

Most such organizations would do this by running investigations and
publishing reports, but the Sunlight Foundation decided to take a
different tack. Instead, [as Klein put
it](http://www.mikeklein.com/text.html), Sunlight would “be utilizing
21st Century information technology, and Web 2.0 energy”.

The Foundation was formed in January 2006 and, thanks to Klein, was
quickly swimming in cash. Their first major project was
[Congresspedia](http://www.congresspedia.org/), a Wikipedia-like site to
keep track of information on members of Congress. Unlike most Web 2.0
sites, they bought large ads on the major political weblogs to promote
the new site. (Despite this blanket promotion — and the hiring of a
full-time editor — the site seems to have about the same level of
activity as the [They Might Be Giants wiki](http://www.tmbw.net/).)

Some of their other projects are about what you’d expect: [a federal
funding-Google Maps mashup](http://sunlightlabs.com/earmarks/), [a
Congressional tag
cloud](http://sunlightlabs.com/widgets/doc/widget_sunlightfoundationtagcloud.php),
[a video contest](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/node/1219) mocking
of members of Congress who don’t release their schedules. (They’ve also
donated money to already-existing related projects, many of which are
doing valuable work.)

Their most recent project was an invite-only conference in San Francisco
to bring together the leaders in this nascent field. (Disclosure: I
attended and just about everyone there from the Sunlight Foundation
invited me to take their money.) Funder Klein hailed the Foundation as
the most important and fastest-growing project he’d ever started, while
executive director Ellen Miller noted that this year they’d launched
several projects, all of which had been successes. (Afterwards I asked
her what her metric for success was. “We’re throwing stuff up on the
wall and seeing what sticks,” she explained. And success, I confirmed,
means “it hasn’t completely fallen apart yet”.)

* * * * *

As a Web 2.0 developer, it’s hard for me to see how even the best Web
2.0 site can have much of a positive impact on government. Genuinely
promoting transparency requires the hard work of doing investigative
research, publishing reports, and promoting them to the media. Bubble
2.0 hype aside, the fanciest pop-up windows and and Google Maps mashups
won’t change that.

The attendees seemed to begin to recognize this. In a breakout session
on reaching users, a guru from Web 2.0 consultancy [Adaptive
Path](http://adaptivepath.com/) tried to walk us through their user
experience process. “Remember,” she told us, “these sites aren’t about
what *you* want to do; they’re about improving the lives of your users
by connecting with their *real needs*.” We gave our example user a name
(Jane) and backstory (too busy driving her kids to care about politics,
but upset at the high gas prices she has to pay). And that’s where we
got stuck. Is Jane really going to muddle through graphs generated from
FEC reporting data?

We decided our saviors would be the “Paul Reveres” — the people who care
enough about politics to slog through the data and then mass email their
friends when they find something good (we concluded that going after
newspaper reporters was too Web 1.0). They would save us from having to
write reports or take positions; all we had to do was make the data
available and let them do the rest.

I’m sure there are a handful of people who actually do this, but it
seems like we’re spending an awful lot to build a site just for them.
And even then, what impact will they have? Even if our Paul Revere finds
the smokingest of smoking guns and posts it on their extremely popular
blog, without a larger political platform it will only fuel the cynicism
that Klein claims he’s trying to combat. (“There they go again,” the
reader thinks, and hits the back button.)

Even if Klein is for some reason averse to taking an actual political
stand (maybe he doesn’t vote the same way as his sons?), there’s still
much to be done. Several people in the session were from the group that
runs [the opensecrets.org website](http://opensecrets.org/), which
details who contributes to which campaign. It’s useful stuff, but even a
hundred of their reports can’t compare to their old-fashioned,
dead-trees book [*Speaking
Freely*](http://www.opensecrets.org/pressreleases/2003/SpeakingFreely.asp),
which brilliantly details the big picture of how money politics actually
works. The author of the book, Larry Makinson, was in the room, but
instead of figuring out how to tell more stories like that, he was busy
worrying about how to make specific numbers come alive.

But what makes *Speaking Freely* so brilliant is that it shows specifics
aren’t the problem. It’s not that donors bribe politicians into changing
their vote — they rarely do — it’s that the entire campaign finance
system forces all our public officials to bend and scrape before
big-money donors, instead of actually listening to the voters.

Such clear analysis makes the solution clear as well: we need to get rid
of privately-financed elections altogether. And, in fact, there is an
organization doing just that. It’s called [Public
Campaign](http://www.publicampaign.org/) and, considering the enormous
odds it’s up against, it’s having incredible success. (Arizona,
Connecticut, and Maine have all adopted clean elections and smaller
projects have been started in six more states.) But the Sunlight
Foundation isn’t giving money to Public Campaign. To the contrary, many
of its top people used to work there.

Public Campaign is just one example; the larger point is that just as
Web 2.0 pixie dust doesn’t automatically make your web site into a
success, just making important data available won’t cause political
change. Justice Brandeis’s clever aphorism to the contrary, sunlight is
not in fact the best disinfectant; actual disinfectant is. Sunlight just
makes it easier for people to look at the pus.

* * * * *

**The Sunlight Foundation responds:** Many people from the Sunlight
Foundation have thoughtfully written to me. Aside from our general
disagreement about the value of the projects Sunlight engages in, they
make several specific points. Since they haven’t provided any letters
for publication, I’ll try to summarize them as fairly as I can:

-   **It’s not “a zero-sum game”.** The open data work that Sunlight
    funds helps projects like Public Campaign by giving them ammunition.
    Center for Responsive Politics data makes it into corruption stories
    in newspapers which, in turn, has made the issue of clean elections
    a more serious part of the public debate.

-   **Sunlight has many other projects.** They’ve provided serious
    grants to a number of organizations — including the [Center for
    Responsive Politics](http://www.opensecrets.org/) — and have a
    number of projects, including [hiring some
    bloggers](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/blog/), doing
    distributed journalism on [Congress’s Family
    Business](http://www.sunlightlabs.com/research/familybusiness/),
    getting 90 candidates to sign [their Punch Clock
    Agreeement](http://www.sunlightnetwork.com/punchclock), and even
    writing [an old-fashioned
    report](http://www.sunlightfoundation.com/daysinsession).

-   **Sunlight has a good relation with Public Campaign.** Mike Klein
    has made donations to Public Campaign on his own; Ellen Miller
    started Public Campaign but left long before she joined Sunlight;
    Micah Sifry was already lowering the amount of time he spent working
    for Public Campaign before he joined Sunlight.

I don’t dispute any of these points, but I think the brunt of my
critique still stands. Changes to the culture of Washington must be
structural ones. These projects, while fun, fundamentally misunderstand
how institutions operate.
