Reagan, Star Wars, and the End of the Cold War
==============================================

March 13, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intheblue)

* * * * *

[![Book
cover](image1_intheblue)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743200233)

It’s not hard to see why building technology to defend against nuclear
missiles is tricky. First, there’s the obvious difficulty of shooting at
a moving target — like a bullet shooting a bullet. Then there’s the fact
that whatever device is defending you must itself be well defended, or
else the enemy can simply take it out. And then there’s the nasty fact
that with nuclear war, near-perfect defense is necessary — even a single
failure can cause enormous damage.

What is hard is explaining why, despite this, so many people took the
idea so seriously. That’s the question Frances FitzGerald takes up in
*Way Out There In The Blue*, in which she uses the “Star Wars”
initiative as a prism with which to understand the Reagan
administration. Combined with Rick Perlstein’s forthcoming *Nixonland*,
the books provide allegorical insight into our current government: Bush
II has combined the criminality of Nixon with the intellectual emptiness
of Reagan.

Ronald Reagan was an actor. Even when off the set, he recited polished
lines and played up a well-practiced demeanor. Indeed, he appears to
have no inner life whatsoever. No one can be found to whom Ronald Reagan
ever “opened up”; even his wife commented that “There’s a wall around
him … even I feel that barrier.” As president, he was given the
equivalent of shooting instructions specifying exactly where he was
supposed to be every hour of the day and when he attended public events
toe marks were chalked on the ground to indicate where he should stand.

Considering the state of the American political system, having an actor
for a President is perhaps not the worst idea. But what was problematic
was that nobody — including Reagan’s closest aides — seemed to realize
that that was what they were getting. For months they were continually
shocked that Reagan refused to ever make a decision or take an action on
any issue whatsoever. Instead, they watched dumbly as he simply listened
to what he was told and nodded politely. When two of his subordinates
disagreed, he was uncomfortable, but he steadfastly refused to
intervene.

The result was that decisions ended up getting made by whoever was
around — Nancy Reagan, his wife; Michael Deaver, his aide in charge of
public relations; etc. Reagan’s top people, such as his cabinet
officials, frightened that they were actually making policy without any
supervision, kept this fact secret from their staffs and the public
until they all published their kiss-and-tell memoirs after Reagan had
left office. Even more shocking, Reagan didn’t seem to mind when the
members of this group changed. One day Reagan’s inner circle informed
him that they were leaving and bringing the Treasury Secretary in to
take their place. Reagan simply thanked them for their service.

There was one thing Reagan did seem to care about (aside from politely
answering his fan mail): speeches. Reagan would rewrite his own
speeches, removing abstract verbiage and adding homespun stories. And it
was out of this concern that he stumbled into launching the Star Wars
initiative.

After many years of right-wing propaganda about a “window of
vulnerability” in our arms race with the Soviet Union, the Pentagon
developed the MX missile series to ensure American superiority. The
problem was where to put them. The MX missiles were designed to protect
against the Soviets simply destroying all of our missiles, so they could
not simply be put out in the open or the Soviets would simply destroy
them as well. A variety of Rube Goldberg-like ideas were proposed to
solve the problem.

After a thorough investigation, the military concluded the best solution
was what came to be called “the racetrack”: the missiles would be put on
huge underground circular tracks, with little launching stations cut
sporadically in the track. There would be several times more launching
stations than missiles, so the Soviets would not know which stations to
attack. But, to verify compliance with arms treaties, the stations could
be opened so that the Soviets could see which ones contained missiles
from space.

The problem was that the racetracks would need to be huge and the only
practical space for such a thing was in Utah. The Mormon Church was
understandably unhappy about having a huge nuclear missile field being
built near them and thus the powerful Republicans from that region of
the country scuttled the plan.

Other ideas were tried — the racetrack was converted to a straight line
system, then to a configuration known as “Dense Pack” in which the
missiles were all placed close together, in the hopes that all the
missiles coming to attack them would blow each other up and perhaps
spare some of our missiles. Another plan, known as “Big Bird”, had the
missiles flying overhead on large transport planes, but it was scrapped
when technicians raised concerns about the wings falling off. Another
proposal involved hiding the missiles as normal luggage on cross-country
passenger trains. It got to the point where the best idea was literally
known as DUMB — deep underground missile basing — in which the missiles
would be loaded on corkscrews which would drill down underground.
Finally, they decided just to deploy the missiles in
superficially-hardened housing, even though this meant they could be
easily destroyed.

At the same time, a mass popular movement for a nuclear freeze was
growing, encompassing college students, churches, and many unpoliticized
citizens. Reagan’s credibility on foreign policy was slipping away while
books and movies and massive protests scared citizens into thinking
about the unthinkable prospect of a nuclear holocaust. The Democrats
were seizing power and mindshare and a nuclear freeze bill passed the
House. Clearly something had to be done.

Missile defense seemed like the perfect alternative. It didn’t require
any diplomatic changes or sacrificing any weapons development — indeed,
it allowed for more spending on research. But it allowed Reagan to use
the language of the doves — a sincere desire to rid the world of the
scourge of nuclear war. So when a Reagan aide proposed the idea (which
the aide conceived of as a chip to be bargained away for with the
Soviets), Reagan seized upon the idea and worked it into a speech at the
next available opportunity.

There was just one problem: nobody had any idea how to make it work. The
most prominent right-wing scientist, Edward Teller, was very excited
about a new technology in which a high-powered X-ray could be sent along
a rod to vaporize small objects. Teller proposed a large satellite with
such rods sticking out of it, a device that came to be known as the
“space-based sea urchin”. What happens when the Soviets target the
defense? he was asked. Teller didn’t seem to have considered the
question but, unfazed, came back the next day suggesting the defense
weapons be stored underwater and “pop up” when missiles were overhead.

Such debates disguised the fact that no actual missile defense
technology existed or was likely to for a long, long time. Tactics and
costs for disintegration rays and sea urchins could be discussed
endlessly, but such discussion was irrelevant, as nobody knew how to
build the key components. But this fact was carefully kept from
politicians and the press who, ignorant of the science, continued to
discuss missile defense as if it was a serious proposal. Thus, a
majority of Americans were convinced that scientific ingenuity would
find a way to protect the country — indeed, they believed it already
had.

But the sheen of a someday-to-be-developed missile defense system could
not last forever — Reagan needed something more repeatable to boost his
flagging poll numbers, especially in the wake of such scandals as
Iran-contra. The result was an ongoing series of carefully-spun summits
with the Soviets, in which the President claimed to be making good
progress on negotiations for arms reduction. (That negotiated arms
reduction could serve as a replacement for a missile defense initiative
never seemed to occur to the Reagan administration; it was not exactly a
group prone to analytical self-reflection.)

On the Russian side, Mikhail Gorbachev, a brilliant and daring new
politician, had come to power. Gorbachev seemed more like an American
figure than a Russian one — he spoke plainly, made daring moves toward
peace, and played well for the cameras. For much of the following years,
Gorbachev had higher poll numbers in the US than Reagan did. Washington
was said to have been swept away with “Gorby fever” and “Gorbymania”.

Gorbachev unilaterally made a series of striking reforms in both
domestic and foreign policy. He offered the US a wide variety of
concessions in disarmament talks, insisting only that the US stop the
SDI program (the one principle which Reagan refused to concede). Then he
begun the process of glasnost, increasing the freedom of the press and
allowing a left-wing reform movement to develop. As part of this, he
freed dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov, who proceeded to tell the
media that SDI was a bluff that the US could never successfully develop.
Shortly thereafter, Gorbachev was even willing to budge on that,
allowing the US to continue SDI. Meanwhile, he begun the process of
perestroika, reforming the Russian political and economic system to
increase the scope of democracy.

Meanwhile, Reagan’s side continued to bungle or misunderstand all of
Gorbachev’s moves, using his disarmament proposals for little more than
PR victories at home and continuing to insist his reforms were merely
cosmetic attempts to prop up the old system. Reagan and Gorbachev
continued to hold summits with plentiful photo opportunities, but little
in the way of actual agreement was ever reached.

Indeed, Reagan actually made Gorbachev’s reforms much more difficult by
doing things like giving speeches demanding the General Secretary “tear
down this wall”. Such speeches only lent credence to the conservatives
who charged that Gorbachev was simply doing the West’s dirty work from
the inside.

Yet despite Reagan’s ineptitude, Gorbachev’s reforms took hold — perhaps
even more strongly than he had intended — and the old Soviet system
began to fall apart. Democratic parties were elected, troops were
withdrawn, and the wall finally came down.

But Americans were reluctant to believe that the destruction of the
Soviet system had come from the reformers within it. Instead, they
retrospectively lionized Reagan as the man whose tough talk had made the
system come apart.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0743200233)


[image1_intheblue]: image1_intheblue.jpg