Bubble City: Chapter 2
======================

November 2, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity2)

* * * * *

Downtown San Francisco is a world of carefully-gridded streets and
looming skyscrapers, but hidden behind a gas station on Third is a place
that almost looks like another world. The sun shines brightly upon a
park with green grass and tall shady trees and vibrant swings with
children. The park is an oval and the perimeter is lined with small,
pastel-colored buildings. Here and there are a smattering of small cafes
and restaurants. And the other buildings are filled with startups.
Twitter here. Adaptive Path there. Even Yahoo, when it wanted to
encourage its employees to be more startup-y, opened up an office in the
neighborhood. Sit on the grass and chances are you’ll sit near a friend
from another company or bump into them in line at a cafe. The place
crawls with companies and back on the street, surveying the scene with a
distant but watchful eye, lie the journalists, whose publications cover
with awe the rumblings of those below. It was here that Newsflip made
its home.

Jason entered the building expecting to be greeted warmly by the relaxed
startup world. Instead, the scene he entered was utter chaos. “Get me
CNN!” shouted a man at the front of the room, apparently to no one in
particular. Others buzzed at their desks, shouting to one another,
shouting at their phones, shouting at their computers, shouting at their
coffee mugs. One guy just seemed to keep spinning around in his chair
for no reason in particular.

Jason stood around surveying the scene for a moment until a man standing
up motioned for him to come over. “What do you mean we can’t get CNN?”
he shouted into his phone. “This is America.” He placed his hand over
the phone and looked down. “You must be Jason,” he said. “Uh, yes, sir.
Are you—” “Goddamn it, I don’t care if you have to *buy* it, I want a 5
minute segment on Wolf Blitzer.” He covered the phone again. “It’s great
to have you on the team, son.” Jason thought this was a bit fast to be
adopted as a son, but didn’t feel like he could press the point.

“Look I don’t have time for this shit,” he suddenly barked. “Just get me
on CNN.” He slammed the phone down, sat down on the side of the desk,
and adopted an avuncular tone. “Let me tell you a little story,” he
said. “Uh, OK,” Jason said, but the man talked right over him.

“One day, not long after I graduated college, I was waiting at a bus
stop. And sitting there on the seat beside me was a magazine, opened to
an article about a newspaper. So I read the article and it just took my
breath away. Took my breath away. And I said to myself, ‘Self, one day
you’re going to be running a newspaper like that.’ Well, it took me
twenty years to do it, but here I am. Sure, technically we don’t use
paper, but we print news all the same, right? Anyway, isn’t that
amazing?”

Jason just smiled and nodded.

“Of course, I didn’t get there just by sitting back and watching. No,
sir. I got there by joining someone else’s startup, seeing how it was
done, and then using what I’d learned to turn around and start a new
company to destroy their main product. Heh, heh. Well, I guess what I’m
saying is that I better keep an eye out on you. Better keep an eye out
on you.”

Jason looked a bit worried. And puzzled.

“Anyway, as you can see things are a bit crazy around here.” He waved
his arm past the still-chaotic room. “So I better get back to work. But
I’m sure you’ll settle in fine — and if there’s any trouble you just let
me know. Good luck!” he added and then picked up the phone again and
started screaming without even dialing.

Looking for his desk, Jason wandered around the office for a bit, past
the spinning, screaming, slacking employees, until he found an unused
desk over in a corner. There was a memo on it, addressed to him,
reminding him of the company’s copyright and confidentiality commitments
that he’d signed, which he promptly tossed in the trash.

He sat down and began inventorying the other contents of the desk: a
flat screen monitor, a dual-processor tower, an IP phone, a keyboard, a
mo—. He noticed a tugging at his leg and looked down. He sprang back.
There was a girl beneath his desk. “Sssssssh!” she whispered and
motioned for him to come towards her. Slowly and awkwardly, he crouched
down and crawled towards the girl. She pulled him under the desk with
her and extended her hand.

“Hi, I’m Sarah,” she said. He shook it. “Hi, I’m, uh, Jason.” “Hey,
Jason! Welcome aboard the team.” “So, why are we down here?” “Because
it’s crazy up there, silly. Why get involved in all that screaming mess
when we can just slip off in the storm and hang out by ourselves?” “I
guess. What’s all the fuss about, though?” “Oh, just some tech pissing
contest. Some blowhard with a webcam doesn’t like some tech decision
some intern made and now everybody’s going DEFCON 5.” “Actually, DEFCON
5 is the lowest level of military activation. I think you probably mean
DEFCON 3.” She just looked at him. He looked back and realized he should
probably shut up.

“So Sarah, what do you do here?” he ventured. “I’m in charge of training
newbies, silly,” she said, and ruffled his hair. “Catch me if you can!”
she added, before darting out from under the desk and running across the
office. Jason followed in pursuit.

She ran to the middle of the roll of desks, then crouched down and
rolled under one of them to the next row. Jason kept running to the end
of the row to try to head her off at the pass, doing his best to dodge
the spinning chairs and thrown balls that were filling the office. Sarah
made a bee-line for the door, stopping only to grab the skateboard lying
next to it, which she used to skitter down the stairwell. Jason hopped
the whole flight after her.

Reaching the bottom, she sped out the door just as an overweight man was
opening it to enter. He jumped out of the way and screwed up his face in
anger. “Don’t you know who I am?” he shouted down the street at her.
“Nope,” replied Jason, running out the door after her.

On the street, she skateboarded around baby strollers, old people, and
dazed-looking hipsters like a pro, while Jason was jogging as fast as he
could just to keep up. She jumped lights right before traffic, took
bizarre shortcuts and side-streets, and occasionally turned back to
laugh at him. After a couple blocks of this she jumped up onto a railing
and headed into a park. The next thing Jason knew she was halfway up a
tree in the middle of a park surrounded by shopping malls and people.
Jason hadn’t come this far just to give up at a tree, so he scurried up
afterwards, finding himself balanced precariously on a branch. Once
again he found himself in a secluded spot surrounded by people, sitting
alone, facing Sarah.

“Not bad, kid,” she said.

* * * * *

Wayne ambled in and pressed the button for the elevator. Once he got to
the office Trent spotted him at the door and, screaming a few last words
into his phone before slamming it down, headed over and led Wayne into a
conference room. The office got silent as he walked by. “Fans!,” he
thought.

Trent shut the door behind him. “Wayne, Wayne, Wayne, so good to see
you!” “Good to see you too, Trent! What’s it been? A couple years?”
“Yeah, must have been that ETech two years ago. The one with that Bezos
keynote.” Wayne laughed. “How could I forget?”

“Anyway, as I’m sure you know I invited you here because we were all
very hurt by your comments on your show yesterday.” “Oh, that silly
thing? Well I certainly hope no one was too offended. I was just sharing
some concerns I had with the changes you were making. That’s all.” “If
you had concerns you should have just taken them to us. My door is
always open to you. You know that.”

Wayne looked at him. “Actually, I don’t. Let’s be frank here. If I try
to get an appointment with any startup in this city they push me off on
the calendar and jerk me around until three months have gone by and
they’ve closed their B round of funding and the VCs have hired a
professional public relations team to professionally sit and ignore
comments from people like me. But if I talk about it on my show I get
ushered into your conference room the next morning. So let’s not play
dumb here. You know as well as I how this game works.”

“Wayne, Wayne, Wayne,” trent said shaking his head. “What do you want?
Do you want us to use this NNA thing? Done! You got it. It doesn’t make
any difference to me. I don’t even know what the hell the thing does.
Look, what do you need from us? Is that all?”

“Thanks, Trent. You’re a sweetheart. That’d be great.” “Well I’m glad we
could settle this so easily. You know, Wayne, if you ever need anything
else, just give me a ring. My door is always open. Hell, I don’t even
have a door! Heh, heh.” “Of course, Trent. Thanks so much.” “Here, let
me see you out.”

Trent ushered Wayne to the door. “Oh, there is one more thing,” Wayne
added. “Sure, what is it?” Trent asked. “Well, I’ve just been noticing
in my referer logs that traffic from Newsflip has been dropping sharply
lately.” “Really? I had no idea,” Trent replied. “Now I’m not asking for
any special treatment here.” “Mo, goodness no, of course not.” “But if
you guys could just look into the anomaly. Try to figure out what could
be going haywire. That would be great.” “Oh, of course Wayne. I’ll put
my top guy on it.” “Thanks so much, Trent. Let’s keep in touch.”
“Let’s.”

* * * * *

All day, people came back and forth through Yerba Buena Park, while
Jason and Sarah hung from the branches above their heads, talking.
Indeed, hours passed before Jason even thought to consult his watch.
Jason was used to seeing other people as a necessary evil: curiosity and
courtesy were behaviors he had worked hard to learn to imitate so that
others didn’t find him too strange, but he did his best to make sure
other people took no more than a couple hours of his time.

Sarah was different. She was the only person he’d ever talked to who
made him feel completely relaxed in his own skin. He didn’t have to
worry about being someone else or trying to be interesting or checking
the time. They just talked and talked and laughed and laughed.

Sarah looked up at the sun overhead where it hung suspended above the
park. “Hey, let’s go grab some lunch she said,” and swung down, branch
to branch, before leaping to the ground. Jason followed, smiling.

* * * * *

Wayne got back in front of the camera and pressed the button.

“Alright, for today’s Internet Hero segment, where I keep an eye out for
the other people who are keeping an eye out for you. I’d like to give a
big shout-out to one of my favorite Internet startups, Newsflip. I had a
great conversation today with Newsflip’s CEO, Trent Rayburn, and he told
me a bit about Newsflip’s philosophy and strategy and I have to say, I’m
100% on board.”

“There are a lot of companies out there that just don’t understand
users. They think you, the people who make their companies run, are just
people to be spat on and squeezed for cash. Not at Newsflip. There’s a
company that puts users first. And I salute them for it. So that’s
today’s Internet Hero: Newsflip.”

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Three](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity3)
