Everybody Tells Me So
=====================

November 3, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/everybodysays)

* * * * *

I remember when I was in fourth grade, while we were eating our snack
(graham crackers and milk) in the kitchen, my classmates began
discussing the effects of wealth. “Money doesn’t make you happy,” I
insisted. I tried to argue the point, but no one else believed me. (The
same class was later adamant that Clinton should be impeached, although
they did spontaneously throw an anti-fur-coat demonstration.) “Of course
money makes you happy,” they insisted. “Just wait, when you’re rich,
you’ll change your mind.”

I haven’t.

* * * * *

On TV, whenever a kid is given a to-him-large sum of money, the fatherly
adult handing it out says “Don’t spend it all in one place.” Don’t want
the kid blowing it on a single movie and then feeling bad that he spent
it all. Someone emailed me the same thing the other day, and I had to
laugh. I don’t really know how to spend the money period. How could I
possibly spend it all in one place? [Donate it to the
UN?](http://edition.cnn.com/US/9709/18/turner.gift/)

* * * * *

A friend told me to be sure not to let the money change me. “How could
it possibly do that?” I asked. “Well, first you’d buy a fancy new car.”
“I don’t know how to drive.” “Then you’d buy a big house in the
suburbs.” “I like living in small apartments.” “And you’d start wearing
expensive clothes.” “I’ve worn a t-shirt and jeans practically every day
of my life.” “And you’d start hanging out with different people.” “I’m
so shy I don’t even hang out with the people I know now!”

* * * * *

For months, every time we thought we’d really gotten somewhere on the
Condé Nast deal, we’d get a call from Paul Graham. “Don’t get your hopes
up,” he’d say. “Deals fall through.” Whenever we passed him on the
street, “Deals fall through.” In emails, “Deals fall through.” It got to
the point that Alexis put up a photo of Paul Graham and captioned it
“Deals fall through.”

I got an email from Paul Graham the other day. “Ok,” he wrote. “Now you
can get your hopes up.”
