Economic BS Detector
====================

January 28, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/economicbs)

* * * * *

People are trying to lie to you. Or maybe they just don’t know what
they’re talking about. Either way, you shouldn’t listen to them. But how
can you tell? Here’s a guidebook of key phrases that indicate someone
doesn’t know what they’re talking about when they talk about the
economy:

* * * * *

**Creates/destroys jobs.** You often hear men of business saying that
their company “created” 2000 new jobs. And in some sense that may be
true, but it’s probably less exciting if it turned out that they did it
by destroying 2000 jobs somewhere else.

The same is true for economic policy in general; it will typically
create jobs in one place, but only at the expense of losing them
somewhere else. That’s because the number of jobs (i.e. the unemployment
rate) isn’t just a free-floating fact of life; it’s specifically
controlled by the Federal Reserve.

The Federal Reserve is a cadre of bankers and economists that, among
other things, meets regularly to decide interest rates. When there are
too few jobs, they lower interest rates, making it easier for people to
borrow money and start new companies, hiring new people and creating
jobs. (The current crisis is the rare exception — interest rates are at
zero and there still aren’t enough jobs. Thus the stimulus package.)
When there are too many jobs, they raise interest rates, making it
harder for businesses to start and expand, and cutting back on jobs.

Wait, too many jobs? The Federal Reserve worries that if unemployment
gets too low, we’ll hit a cycle of accelerating inflation where prices
spiral up and up. [Critics
argue](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/predatorstate) that they actually
don’t like low unemployment because then businesses have to compete for
employees, which means they have to pay more and give out nicer
benefits. So, critics argue, they try to leave some unemployment, so
that *employees* are competing and can be pushed into taking lower
wages.

If you really care about how many jobs there are — and obviously you
should — then you shouldn’t worry about particular policies or people,
whose effects either won’t matter or will be counteracted by the Fed.
You should worry about the Fed and who controls it.

* * * * *

**Helps/hurts competitiveness.** Let’s face facts: America isn’t
competing with anyone. Remember competition? You sell a widget for \$5;
I come along and sell it for \$4; then you have to either lower your
price or lose all your customers to me and go bankrupt.

But America isn’t going to go bankrupt. Countries don’t really do that
sort of thing.

Instead, what matters for how well a country is doing is (roughly
speaking) its productivity, i.e. how much stuff it makes per person-hour
of work. Sometimes you can increase this productivity by working with
other countries — by, for example, trading some steel for some coffee.
But this is just a way to up your own country’s productivity; it has
nothing to do with competition.

The competitiveness bogeyman is often trotted out when someone is trying
to get you to do something you don’t want. “Oh, sure,” they say, “you
may not want to do it, but the Chinese are and they’re going to eat your
lunch.” It just isn’t so. Nothing will stop us from chugging along,
eating our lunch just fine; even if the Chinese are eating two lunches.

* * * * *

Sadly, a lot of “economic commentators” don’t know what they’re talking
about, so you see these phrases *everywhere*. Now that you know they’re
bogus, it should save you a lot of time.
