On Intellectual Dishonesty
==========================

December 14, 2011

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/intellectualdishonesty)

* * * * *

Dishonesty has two parts: 1) saying something that is untrue, and 2)
saying it with the intent to mislead the other person. You can have each
without the other: you can be genuinely mistaken and thereby say
something false without intending to mislead, and you can intentionally
mislead someone without ever saying anything that’s untrue. (The second
is generally considered deceit, but not dishonesty.)

However, you can be intellectually dishonest without doing *either* of
these things. Imagine that you’re conducting an experiment and most of
the time it comes out exactly the way you expect but one time it goes
wrong (you probably just screwed up the measurements). Telling someone
about your work, you say: “Oh, it works just the way I expected — seven
times it came out exactly right.”

This isn’t untrue and it isn’t intentionally misleading — you really do
believe it works the way you expected. But it is intellectually
dishonest: intellectual honesty requires bending-over-backwards to
provide any evidence that you might be wrong, *even if you’re convinced
that you are right*.

This is an impractical standard to apply to everyday life. A prospective
employer asks you in a job interview if you can get to work on time. You
say “Yes”, not “I think so, but one time in 2003 the power went out and
so my alarm didn’t go off and I overslept”. I don’t think anyone
considers this dishonesty; indeed, if you were intellectually honest all
the time people would think you were pretty weird.

Science has a higher standard. It’s not just between you and your
employer, it’s a claim to posterity. And you might be wrong, but what if
you’re not around for posterity to call you up and ask you to show your
work? That’s why intellectual honesty requires you show your work in
advance, so that others can see if you’re missing something.
