A Reading Machine
=================

March 29, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/readingmachine)

* * * * *

One of the things that has long puzzled me is why children, who so
incredibly pick up spoken language without formal instruction, encounter
so much trouble when learning to read. Perhaps, I thought for a while,
it is because there is a “language organ” that has specifically evolved
to let them learn speech while reading has to be learned with more
general portions of the brain. But the more I learn about neurology, the
more ridiculous that seems.

In retrospect, the answer is rather obvious. Children learn a language
because they are surrounded by it. It’s unavoidable. Their world is full
of people speaking it and the pattern matchers in their brains go to
town, figuring out the structures underlying its grammar and associated
its vocabulary with the other things they see around them.

It’s impossible for there to be anything similar with words. Sure, some
words appear in fairly regular positions (MEN on bathroom doors,
perhaps) and children may learn to recognize them, but for the most part
words are rather avoidable and their patterns hard to spot. How are
children to draw a connection between the words in the newspaper and any
sentences that they can understand? The only clues are the pictures and
anyone who’s read picturebooks to a kid knows that kids make valiant use
of those few clues, but it’s simply not enough to let them learn to
read.

What’s needed is a way to give children the additional clues they
require, but at their own pace. An adult can read books but only reads
linearly and soon gets bored of reading the same thing over and over
again. (I’ve often thought that children were being stupid by reading
the same things over and over and over again. Now I realize I’m the
stupid one; it’s the kids who are being smart. Only through repetition
can your brain see the patterns!) It’s very difficult for children to
pick up a pattern under such conditions.

But devices never get tired, so I would propose a device. Here is what I
imagine: Give the child an iPad with a special program for reading
books. The program provides a selection of nice picture books with words
in large type underneath. Switching pages can be done the usual way;
kids seem pretty good at figuring out gestural interfaces. But the big
innovation is simply this: when you touch a word, it turns red while the
speakers say it out loud.

In this way, the child can have the machine read the book to them. Tap
the words in sequence and the book pronounces them. If a word is somehow
unclear, just tap it again. When you finish the page, just go to the
next one. When you finish a book, read another, or start over.

Soon, I imagine, the child will make some basic associations. They will
learn that tapping the word “the” makes the sound “thuh” and means
“the”. They will no longer need to tap it every time to find this out —
they can save time by saying it out loud themselves. Eventually, they
can just say it in their heads.

Pretty quickly, more and more common words can be handled this way. Then
the child begins noticing patterns between common words. All the words
beginning with k have a kuh sound! With such patterns recognized, some
words can be sounded out. Eventually, only strange words need to be
tapped — the rest the child can read by themselves.

People who have not spent much time around children might claim such a
device will make children lazy — why learn to read when a device will do
it for them? But children are desperate to read; those who cannot will
often try to memorize the shorter books their parents read to them so
they can pretend to read those books themselves. This device would
simply give them the tools they need. It would lead their brains to make
the same associations that the software makes occur physically: point at
this word, hear this sound. And there’s nothing are brains are better at
than recognizing such simple patterns and being able to predict them in
the future.

Perhaps this software already exists. If so, please tell me. If not, I’d
like to work with someone to make it. Will it work? There’s only one way
to find out, but I think it’s got a pretty good shot.
