The Miracle Diet
================

April 26, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/miraclediet)

* * * * *

[![](image1_miraclediet)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640)

You eat food that has calories. And you do things that burn calories.
The calories left over get stored as fat. And thus, the typical advice
for losing weight: eat less, exercise more. Fewer calories are eaten and
more are burned and so the result is less fat. There’s just one problem:
that’s really hard. To burn enough calories to lose a lot of weight, you
really have to put an awful lot of time into it. And if you try to eat
less, your body just feels hungry all the time, because it wants more.

So what if instead of forcing your body to eat less, you teach your body
to *want* less. After all, it’s clear that it’s obesity, not lack of
fat, that’s the health problem. So getting your body to want less food
would be a good thing. And it would make dieting incredibly easy too —
instead of fighting to count calories or avoid eating certain foods, you
do nothing at all; you’re just not interested in eating.

It sounds like a pipe dream, but Seth Roberts argues that it’s possible.
Drawing on the results of a number of studies with rats, his own
experiments on himself, and the best research on nutrition and weight
loss, he’s developed a theory of how the body decides what it feels like
eating.

Our body’s weight, he says, is regulated by a “set point”, like the
setting on a thermostat. If our weight is lower than our internal set
point, we feel hungry; higher, we feel full. So if you want to weigh
less, all you need to do is lower your body’s set point. Your body will
stop being hungry, you’ll burn the fat you already have, and your weight
will go down.

But how would you do that? Roberts argues that a person’s set point
isn’t fixed, instead it goes up and down based on what they eat. After
all, the whole reason the body stores up calories when food is abundant
is so it can use them in “lean years”, when food is scarce. So it would
make sense for a person’s set point to go up when food is abundant
(allowing them to build up fat) and down when it’s scarce (so they don’t
feel hungry all the time).

The problem, of course, is that food is never scarce anymore. You can
always just go to McDonald’s. The body is storing up for an eventuality
that will never come. So how do you get it to stop? Maybe you could
trick it into thinking food was scarce.

This is where Roberts’s big insight comes — he argues that we use a
Pavlovian sort of flavor-conditioning system to see whether food is
scarce. If we eat foods frequently, we grow to like their taste, and
thus our brain realizes we’re eating them out of choice and raises the
set point. On the other hand, if we eat new foods or foods with little
taste, our brain assumes we’re eating them because there’s nothing else
around and the set point is lowered.

And thus, the way to lower your set point: eat foods with no taste. Of
course, they have to have calories as well, so Roberts’s preferred
suggestion is extra-light olive oil (ELOO), which is basically just oil
with absolutely no taste. Your body gets the calories but it doesn’t get
the taste, so the set point goes lower every time you eat it.

It all seems crazy, but Roberts is sort of a crazy guy, so he decided to
test it. He started taking a couple hundred tasteless calories every
day. Almost immediately, he begun feeling less hungry. He started eating
one meal every other day, even while still exercising, and felt great.
He lost a pound of weight a week with no effort. He lost so much weight
that his friends started telling him that he looked too thin, so he
started taking less tasteless calories and put some weight back on. It
was amazing; a diet plan unlike any other.

He told friends about it and it worked for them too. It was written up
in *The New York Times* and readers wrote in with letters saying it was
working for them. Blogs started to keep track of people’s stories —
almost all successful. And now he has a new book yesterday, *The
Shangri-La Diet*, which explains how you can do it to.

The book is odd, in that it looks pretty much like any other silly diet
book, but the contents are rather different. Although clearly rushed,
the book has an appendix of scientific studies using rats to back up its
arguments about theory and happily features the stories of people who
tried the diet and found it didn’t work along with those who tried the
diet and found it did.

Obviously, such anecdotal evidence isn’t enough to prove the system
works, but it does make it intriguing enough to try. I’ve started taking
a couple tablespoons of extra light olive oil and already I found myself
skipping a meal, something I’ve never been able to do before. We’ll see
how it goes.

-   [Buy the book from Amazon](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0399153640)


[image1_miraclediet]: image1_miraclediet.jpg