What’s Going On Here?
=====================

May 15, 2005

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whaaaa)

* * * * *

I’m adding this post not through blogging software, like I normally do,
but by hand, right into the webpage. It feels odd. I’m doing this
because a week or so ago my web server started making funny error
messages and not working so well. The web server is in Chicago and I am
in California so it took a day or two to get someone to check on it. The
conclusion was the hard drive had been fried.

When the weekend ended, we sent the disk to a disk repair place. They
took a look at it and a couple days later said that they couldn’t do
anything. The heads that normally read and write data on a hard drive by
floating over the magnetized platter had crashed right into it. While
the computer was giving us error messages it was also scratching away a
hole in the platter. It got so thin that you could see through it.

This was just in one spot on the disk, though, so we tried calling the
famed Drive Savers to see if they could recover the rest. They seemed to
think they wouldn’t have any better luck. (Please, plase, please, [tell
me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com) if you know someplace to try.)

I hadn’t backed the disk up for at least a year (in fairness, I was
literally going to back it up when I found it giving off error messages)
and the thought of the loss of all that data was crushing. I broke down
crying and couldn’t function.

I’ve since been trying to piece things together from the old backup and
the Google cache and so on, but it’s a painful and time-consuming
process, and even without this on my hands I am extremely lacking time.
I’ll try my best, though.

Thanks to everyone for their kind words and support. If you have some
files you think I might be missing, [let me
know](mailto:me@aaronsw.com). If you have some disposable income and
want to help fund the purchase of a new server and perhaps the recovery
of the old disk, [you can make a
donation](https://www.paypal.com/cgi-bin/webscr?cmd=_xclick&business=me%40aaronsw%2ecom&item_name=Server+Support).

Sorry for screwing up.
