The Attraction of the Center
============================

July 12, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whycentrism)

* * * * *

“Centrism” is the tendency to see two different beliefs and attempt to
split the difference between them. The reason why it’s a bad idea should
be obvious: truth is independent of our beliefs, no less than any other
partisans, centrists ignore evidence in favor of their predetermined
ideology.

So what’s the attraction? First, it requires little thought: arguing for
a specific position requires collecting evidence and arguing for it.
Centrism, simply requires repeating some of what A is saying and some of
what B is saying and mixing them together. Centrists often don’t even
seem to care if the bits they take contradict each other.

Second, it’s somewhat inoffensive. Taking a strong stand on A or B will
unavoidably alienate some. But being a centrist, one can still maintain
friends on both sides, since they will find at least some things that
you espouse to be agreeable with their own philosophies.

Third, it makes it easier to suck up to those in charge, because the
concept of the “center” can easily move along with shifts in power. A
staunch conservative will have to undergo a major change of political
philosophy to get a place in liberal administration. A centrist can
simply espouse a few more positions from the conservatives and a few
less from the liberals and fit in just fine. This criteria explains why
centrists are so prevalent in the pundit class (neither administration
is tempted to really force them out) and why so many “centrist” pundits
espouse mostly conservative ideas these days (the conservatives are in
power).

Fourth, despite actually being a servant of those in power, centrism
gives one the illusion of actually being a serious, independent thinker.
“People on the right and on the left already know what they’re going to
say on every issue,” they might claim, “but we centrists make decisions
based on the situation.” (This excuse was recently used in a fundraising
letter by *The New Republic*.) Of course, the “situation” that’s used to
make these decisions is simply who’s currently in power, as discussed
above, but that part is carefully omitted.

Fifth, it appeals to the public. There’s tremendous dissatisfaction
among the public with the government and our system of politics. Despite
being precisely in the middle of this corrupt system, centrists can
claim that they’re actually “independents” and “disagree with both the
left and the right”. They can denounce “extremism” (which isn’t very
popular) and play the “moderate”, even when their positions are
extremely far from what the public believes or what the facts say.

Together, these reasons combine to make centrism an especially
attractive place to be in American politics. But the disease is far from
limited to politics. Journalists frequently suggest the truth lies
between the two opposing sources they’ve quoted. Academics try to
distance themselves from policy positions proposed by either party. And,
perhaps worst of all, scientists try to split the difference between two
competing theories.

Unfortunately for them, neither the truth nor the public necessarily
lies somewhere in the middle. Fortunately for them, more valuable
rewards do.

Exercise for the reader: What’s the attraction of “contrarianism”, the
ideology subscribed to by online magazines like *Slate*?
