Confront reality
================

September 9, 2012

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/anders)

* * * * *

*This post is part five of the series [Raw
Nerve](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve).*

We are all capable of believing things which we know to be untrue, and
then, when we are finally proved wrong, impudently twisting the facts so
as to show that we were right. Intellectually, it is possible to carry
on this process for an indefinite time: the only check on it is that
sooner or later a false belief bumps up against solid reality, usually
on a battlefield.

—George Orwell, “[In Front of Your
Nose](http://orwell.ru/library/articles/nose/english/e_nose)”

If you want to understand experts, you need to start by finding them. So
the psychologists who wanted to understand “expert performance” began by
testing alleged experts, to see how good they really were.

In some fields it was easy: in chess, for example, great players can
reliably beat amateurs. But in other fields, it was much, much harder.

Take punditry. In his giant 20-year study of expert forecasting, Philip
Tetlock found that someone who merely predicted “everything will stay
the same” would be right more often than most professional
pundits.^[1](#fn:tet)^ Or take therapy. Numerous studies have found an
hour with a random stranger is just as good as an hour with a
professional therapist.^[2](#fn:dawes)^ In one study, for example,
sessions with untrained university professors helped neurotic college
students just as much as sessions with professional
therapists.^[3](#fn:strupp)^ (This isn’t to say that therapy isn’t
helpful — the same studies suggest it is — it’s just that what’s helpful
is talking over your problems for an hour, not anything about the
therapist.)

As you might expect, pundits and therapists aren’t fans of these
studies. The pundits try to weasel out of them. As Tetlock writes; “The
trick is to attach so many qualifiers to your vague predictions that you
will be well positioned to explain pretty much whatever happens. China
will fissure into regional fiefdoms, but only if the Chinese leadership
fails to manage certain trade-offs deftly, and only if global economic
growth stalls for a protracted period, and only if…”^[4](#fn:t2)^ The
therapists like to point to all the troubled people they’ve helped with
their sophisticated techniques (avoiding the question of whether someone
unsophisticated could have helped even more). What neither group can do
is point to clear evidence that what they do works.

Compare them to the chess grandmaster. If you try to tell the chess
grandmaster that he’s no better than a random college professor, he can
easily play a professor and prove you wrong. Every time he plays, he’s
confronted with inarguable evidence of success or failure. But
therapists can often feel like they’re helping — they just led their
client to a breakthrough about their childhood — when they’re actually
not making any difference.

Synthesizing hundreds of these studies, K. Anders Ericsson concluded
that what distinguishes experts from non-experts is engaging in what he
calls *deliberate practice*.^[5](#fn:anders)^ Mere practice isn’t enough
— you can sit and make predictions all day without getting any better at
it — it needs to be a kind of practice where you receive “immediate
informative feedback and knowledge of results.”^[6](#fn:a2)^

In chess, for example, you pretty quickly discover whether you made a
smart move or a disastrous error, and it’s even more obvious in other
sports (when practicing free-throws, it’s pretty obvious if the ball
misses the net). As a result, chess players can try different tactics
and learn which ones work and which don’t. Our pundit is not so lucky.
Predicting a wave of revolutions in the next twenty years can feel very
exciting at the time, but it will be twenty years before you learn
whether it was a good idea or not. It’s hard to get much deliberate
practice on that kind of time frame.

* * * * *

I’ve noticed very ambitious people often fall into this sort of trap.
Any old slob can predict what will happen tomorrow, they think, but I
want to be truly great, so I will pick a much harder challenge: I will
predict what will happen *in a hundred years*. It comes in lots of
forms: instead of building another silly site like Instagram, I will
build an *artificial intelligence*; instead of just doing another boring
experiment, I will write *a grand work of social theory*.

But being great isn’t as easy as just picking a hard goal — in fact,
picking a really hard goal avoids reality almost as much as picking a
really easy one. If you pick an easy goal, you know you’ll always
succeed (because it’s so easy); if you pick a really hard one, you know
you’ll never fail (because it will always be too early to tell).
Artificial intelligence is a truly big problem — how can you possibly
expect us to succeed in just a decade? But we’re making great progress,
we swear.

The trick is to set yourself lots of small challenges along the way. If
your startup is eventually going to make a million dollars, can it start
by making ten? If your book is going to eventually persuade the world,
can you start by persuading your friends? Instead of pushing all your
tests for success way off to the indefinite future, see if you can pass
a very small one right now.

And it’s important that you test for the right thing. If you’re writing
a program that’s supposed to make people’s lives easier, what’s
important is not whether they like your mockups in focus groups; it’s
whether you can make a prototype that actually improves their lives.

* * * * *

One of the biggest problems in writing self-help books is getting people
to actually take your advice. It’s not easy to tell a compelling story
that changes the way people view their problems, but it turns out to be
a lot easier than writing something that will actually persuade someone
to get up off the couch and change the way they live their life. There
are some things writing is really good at, but forcing people to get up
and do something isn’t one of them.

The irony, of course, is that the books are totally useless unless you
take their advice. If you just keep reading them, thinking “that’s so
insightful! that changes everything,” but never actually doing anything
different, then pretty quickly the feeling will wear off and you’ll
start searching for another book to fill the void. Chris Macleod calls
this “epiphany addiction”: “Each time they feel like they’ve stumbled on
some life changing discovery, feel energized for a bit without going on
to achieve any real world changes, and then return to their default of
feeling lonely and unsatisfied with their life. They always end up back
at the drawing board of trying to think their way out of their problem,
and it’s not long before they come up with the latest pseudo earth
shattering insight.”^[7](#fn:ss)^

Don’t let that happen to you. Go out and test yourself today: pick a
task just hard enough that you *might* fail, and try to succeed at it.
Reality is painful — it’s so much easier to keep doing stuff you know
you’re good at or else to pick something so hard there’s no point at
which it’s obvious you’re failing — but it’s impossible to get better
without confronting it.

**Next in this series:** [Cherish
mistakes](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/geremiah)

* * * * *

1.  Philip Tetlock, *Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How Can
    We Know?* (2006). I don’t have my copy handy, so I checked this
    description against Philip Tetlock, “[Reading Tarot on K
    Street](http://nationalinterest.org/bookreview/reading-tarot-on-k-street-3220),”
    *The National Interest* (September/October 2009),
    57–67. [↩](#fnref:tet)

2.  Robyn M. Dawes, *House of Cards: Psychology and Psychotherapy Built
    on Myth* (1996). [↩](#fnref:dawes)

3.  Hans H. Strupp and Suzanne W. Hadley, “[Specific vs Nonspecific
    Factors in Psychotherapy: A Controlled Study of
    Outcome](http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1979.01780100095009),”
    *Archives of General Psychology* **36**:10 (1979),
    1125–1136. [↩](#fnref:strupp)

4.  Tetlock, “Reading Tarot,” 67. [↩](#fnref:t2)

5.  K. Anders Ericsson, Ralf Th. Krampe, and Clemens Tesch-Römer, “[The
    Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert
    Performance](http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.100.3.363),”
    *Psychological Review*, **100**:3 (July 1993),
    363–406. [↩](#fnref:anders)

6.  Ericsson, “Role,” 367. [↩](#fnref:a2)

7.  Chris Macleod, “[‘Epiphany
    Addiction’](http://www.succeedsocially.com/epiphany),” *Succeed
    Socially* ([visited
    2012-09-09](http://www.webcitation.org/6AYB8AIbz)). [↩](#fnref:ss)


