A Saipan Story
==============

September 14, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/saipan)

* * * * *

*The following is fiction. Violent, explicit fiction. However, while the
characters are fictional, the setting is entirely real.*

Jason wakes up in an elegant DC apartment, sunlight streaming in through
the picture windows and making the white walls gleam. He brushes his
teeth and showers, before putting on his customary white-collared shirt.
Only today he isn’t going to the office. Instead, a hired car waits
outside to take him to the airport, where he’ll be travelling (first
class, of course) to Saipan, that grand “laboratory of liberty” he’s
known so much about, and on which he is due to write an article for some
conservative magazine or other (his employers will place it).

He begins the piece in the car: a small island off the coast of Japan,
Saipan was made an American protectorate after World War II. Only its
unique agreement allows it to ignore many US laws, making it as close to
a free-market paradise as could be imagined: a guest-worker program, low
taxes, and no meddlesome industry regulation. A tropical paradise
indeed. The thrill of the idea sustains him through the day’s journey.

Meeting him at the airport is Jack Abramoff, the conservative hero who
set up this Saipan tour program, and a bunch of other, mostly older,
faces he vaguely recognizes from around the capitol. Abramoff runs such
tours regularly, helping spread the word among his tribe of this
all-too-little known conservative success story.

* * * * *

Triana awoke in a Philippines shantytown, ramshackle huts spread amongst
open-air markets. She had heard whispers of a better life out there and
when, one day, a man offered to take her to America, she eagerly
accepted. She was crammed in with a boatload of others for a packed
journey to the far-off land. But soon enough they arrived and her hosts
showed them all to their barracks, accommodations they’d obligingly
provided.

As they were taken to their quarters, she breathed in deep the tropical
air. “Ahh, the smell of America,” she exclaimed. She heard a laugh from
someone behind her. “America?” he chuckled. “Welcome to Saipan.”

* * * * *

Jason steps off the plane into a tropical paradise, full of verdant palm
trees, golden beaches, and a dazzling sunset. Abramoff shows them to
their elegant hotel ([complete with private
beach](http://saipan.regency.hyatt.com/hyatt/hotels/gallery/photos.jsp?hotelId=83&start=1))
and invites them to meet him back in the lobby for the official tour the
next morning. Jason changes into his bathing suit and goes for a quick
swim, before tucking himself into his lusciously-outfitted bed.

The next morning, Abramoff begins the tour with eighteen holes of golf,
carved into a cliff overseen by the mountains and overlooking a fabulous
bay. As they play, Abramoff catches up on their stories and dazzles them
with tales of Saipan’s splendor.

That night he provides a special treat — he takes them to the red-light
district, where incredibly-thin bikin-wearing girls cast mournful,
searching looks at the well-suited group of tourists. Jason smiles, but
he is almost taken aback by the hungry gleam in some of the older
businessmen’s eyes. One rotund White House official grabs two girls, one
on each arm, and drags them over to a pay-by-the-hour hotel. The others
all go off looking for their fancy. “What about you Abramoff?” Jason
asks. “Oh, I’ve already got a girlfriend here,” he winks. “Guess I’ll
see you guys tomorrow,” he adds before heading off.

Jason shrugs his shoulders and heads toward a slender girl, apparently
in her teens, with a kind smile on his face. The girl smiles widely
back.

* * * * *

They were fenced in, Triana and the others, allowed only to shuffle
between the barracks and the windowless, exit-barred factory. If they
disobeyed, they would be deported immediately, all their possessions
confiscated. If they attempted to escape, the police would chase them
down and beat them. From then on, their life was to sew khakis for
Californians, complete with the “Made in the USA” labels that give their
future owners such comfort.

There were few comforts for Triana. Bathrooms whose access was strictly
controlled and whose condition was so filthy that one was inclined to
avoid them altogether. Rations so tough one had to saw through them with
the plastic knife. And, of course, the constant, seething hum of sewing
machines in the semi-darkness.

Each night, when they headed back to their barracks after their shift,
they were accosted by men, leaning against their cars and flashing
dollar bills. “Come on, just a little something?” one might call. “Let
me show you a good time,” another might add. The factory does not pay
cash, so the only way for Triana to make some money is to crawl under
their steering wheels and extend her tongue.

* * * * *

The next day, Abramoff takes to meet the local pwoer-players. Factory
owners gush about the island’s incredible economic growth, and
politicians (many of whom got their start as humble factory owners),
warn them about the Federal Government’s imperialist (and racist)
interference with their local way of life. “They want to shut us down,”
one insists. “The leftists can’t stand to have us proving that the free
market works!” Even the island’s Democrats have seen the light, signing
on to plans for school vouchers, low taxes, and right-to-work laws.

They close off the day with a tour of a model factory. It is a clean and
well-lit place, and the employees he introduces them to all gush with
thanks for their newfound prosperity in life. Afterwards, Abramoff takes
them deeper into the complex and invites them to take a factory girl
home for the night.

Jason is struck by one girl with dazzling eyes and is immediately
smitten. “Jason,” he says, extending his hand. “Triana,” she replies.
She speaks little English, but Jason is satisfied to spend the whole
trip back simply staring into her eyes.

Back in his hotel room, he eagerly tears off her clothes and begins
caressing her naked body, slowly removing his garments as well. He flips
her over and lifts her up onto all fours, slipping on a condom before
sliding into her from behind. Triana moans with his thrusts and he
thinks about the power he has here, able to instantly have any girl he
desires. His thrusts grow harder and soon he is knocking her skull into
the bed’s headboard, which only makes him pump harder still. (Outside, a
cleaning maid shakes her head at the noise.) Harder and harder he goes
until, with a sickening crack, he comes, and collapses onto her back
with a thud.

He breathes in deep, but there’s a strange smell. He opens his eyes to
find a line of blood running thru Triana’s hair and down onto the blood.
“Shit!” he exclaims, and pulls out, his erection fading. He spins the
girl over and shakes her violently, but her body feels strangely limp.
He feels her pulse and she is gone. “Shit!” he says again, only quieter
this time.

He is breathing heavily; he needs to focus, needs to think of a plan. He
looks around the room. A window! He wraps he girl up in the sheets, and
hoists her over to it and tosses her out, making a quiet thud on the
ground below. Turning back to the bed, he notices more sheets stained
with blood. He tears them up and tosses them out too, covering the body.
Luckily, however, the bed is so lusciously appointed that nothing has
gotten through to the mattress and very little is on the headboard. He
wipes it clean, showers the blood off himself, and takes a deep breath
before heading for the front desk.

“I’d like to rent a car,” he tells the concierge. “Of course, sir,” he
replies. Soon he is loading the bundle of limbs and sheets into the
trunk of an SUV and heading off down the coast. He finds a boat rental
spot and manages to smuggle the body on board the craft. He ties on some
ballast for good measure and then takes it all some ways out into the
ocean, before pitching it overboard.

Back in his hotel room (his bed having been quickly remade), he stares
at his hands. He has murdered, he has taken a human life. And yet, he
has gotten away with it. The women here so eagerly give themselves up to
be used here, used and discarded, discarded like just another market
good. And nobody cares if they are gone — nobody cares about them at
all. What power, to be able to control human life like that. What power,
to be that kind of man.

That night, the sex is incredible.

* * * * *

Unfortunately, his island carouse is fast coming to an end. The next day
Abramoff takes them back to the airport and quickly he finds himself
back in his DC apartment, showering and putting on his white-collared
shirt, before heading into the office. He finishes off his story on
Saipan (“Maybe we on the mainland can learn something about freedom from
our far-flung island commonwealth,” he
[writes](http://www.heartland.org/policybot/results.html?artId=940).
“Imagine: an island paradise where newcomers are welcomed and enterprise
flourishes.”) and sends it to his bosses. But even with the job
finished, he can’t shake the island from his mind.

His life of white apartments and gray offices seems stale now, he longs
for a little excitement in his life. He heads to a Adams Morgan bar, but
the girls here are all involved in their own scenarios, with none of the
come-hither looks of those on the island. He nurses a beer at the bar,
trying to put the longing out of his mind. An attractive girl comes to
the bar, ordering drinks for her friends. As she scoops up the drinks
and heads back, Jason calls out at her: “Hey there, can I get you
anything?” She turns around and stares at him, before turning back and
walking away.

He has to get back to Saipan.
