Sci Foo 2007 Gossip Liveblog
============================

August 4, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/scifoo07)

* * * * *

*Industry heavyweights [O’Reilly](http://www.oreilly.com/),
[Google](http://www.google.com/), and [Nature](http://www.nature.com/)
come together to sponsor a science-focused version of O’Reilly’s runaway
success [FOO Camp](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foo_Camp), bringing
together top people in the field to eat and gab and plot. Our
correspondent on the scene at Google headquarters in Mountain View and
the conference hotel in Sunnyvale (where Google purchased a room for
every attendee) will be providing live updates on the famous and their
doings.*

### Friday night

[Martha Stewart](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martha_Stewart) is here
with her boyfriend [Charles
Simonyi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Simonyi). [Frank
Wilczek](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frank_Wilczek) is just as friendly
in person as on TV. Dinner with [Nat
Torkington](http://radar.oreilly.com/nat/) and [Hal
Varian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hal_Varian). [James
Randi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Randi) just told me to get
glasses. [Esther](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esther_Dyson) and
[Freeman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_Dyson) are here — double
Dyson decadence! [Paul
Sereno](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Sereno), America’s Most
Photogenic Paleontologist looks photogenic in person too. [Jaron
Lanier](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaron_Lanier) seems to know
everyone.

Kid looks past me to ask what the guy next to me does. I look miffed. He
looks back at me and says “well, come on, everyone knows your story.”

[Tim O’Reilly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_O%27Reilly) kicks things
off by singing a duet of “I Feel Good”. [Ted
Selker](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ted_Selker) gabs about our
distractible mutual friend. [Dean
Kamen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Kamen) brags about the robots
he’s seen. [Lee Smolin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lee_Smolin).
[Eugenie Scott](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Scott) gets a round
of applause. [Neal
Stephenson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal_Stephenson) and [Kim
Stanley Robinson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Stanley_Robinson) are
sitting together. Lots of comic book artists. [Theodore
Gray](http://www.theodoregray.com/). [Chris
Anderson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Anderson_%28writer%29).
[Yossi Vardi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yossi_Vardi) says hi. [Eric
Drexler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_Drexler). Vik Olliver talks
about his [self-replicating 3D printers](http://reprap.org/). [Danny
Hillis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danny_Hillis). [George
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Dyson_%28science_historian%29)
is also here. [Sergey Brin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Brin)
says he likes neck stretches.

A quick glance makes it seem about 10% female, but Tim says it’s more
like 23%.

Paul Sereno brought a bunch of fossils. We’re not supposed to blog them
until he’s published. [Drew
Endy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drew_Endy) talks about domesticating
biotech and [a summer camp](http://www.igem2007.com/) where college
freshmen do their own biotech engineering. [Felice
Frankel](http://web.mit.edu/felicef/) shows series of brilliant science
photos from her work with G. M. Whitesides and promotes
[imageandmeaning.org](http://imageandmeaning.org/). [Saul
Griffith](http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~saul/) and [Jim
McBride](http://foocamp.crowdvine.com/profile/show/1216) show a series
of diagrams to explain energy sources, paths, and usage. Charles Simonyi
talks about his time in space. Martha Stewart talks about the food she
made for him.

The hallways are full of people to talk to — I don’t go for a minute
before getting into a conversation. [Kovas
Boguta](http://www.wolframscience.com/summerschool/2003/participants/boguta.html)
hints at his latest secret project. [Sarah
Brown](http://sarahbrown.name/?page_id=2) catches up. The famed
[LH](http://www.blogger.com/profile/04472868563053273609) shares her
inexhaustible supply of *love*. [Daniel
Chudnov](http://onebiglibrary.net/bio) of the Library of Congress
introduces himself and tells me about the ten terabytes of data they
have at [Chronicling America](http://www.loc.gov/chroniclingamerica/).
[Brady Forrest](http://radar.oreilly.com/brady/) tells me about the many
conferences he worries about.

### Saturday

[Martha](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martha_Stewart) saw one of her
subordinates eat food that’s been out too long and worried that she
would die of salmonella. [Vaughan
Bell](http://www.iop.kcl.ac.uk/staff/profile/?go=10947) tells me what
it’s like to study people with psychosis and delusions. A group at
breakfast wonders who is the Richard Feynman and Carl Sagan of our era.
CSI has driven so many people into forensics that colleges have started
whole new programs because of it — can we do the same for the rest of
science? “Science shows always show us at the university all day,” one
complains. “How come they never show us at the pub or at meetings like
this?”

In one session a group of people discuss their citizen science projects
— attempts to let normal people assist them with science. Others talk
about visualizing data and transporting huge swaths of it. Google
security is frighteningly helpful. [Danny
Hillis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danny_Hillis) talks in the hallway
about buying land for his clock. [Jeff
Hawkins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeff_Hawkins) talks about his
neocortical theory. [Eugenie
Scott](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Scott) speaks on the attacks
on evolution. [Henry Gee](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Gee) on the
Jewish community in London: “People are shocked if their rabbi is not a
practicing lesbian.”

I signed up to give a talk.

At lunch there was a fellow working on genetically evolving robots,
using a 3D printer to make the robots. Zach Kaplan of
[Inventables](http://www.inventables.com/) had a big bag at the table,
from which he kept pulling out the most amazing things — squishy
magnets, plastic that expands in water, instant snow, erasable pens, and
so on. It was hilariously fun. On the way back in my old friend [Chris
Anderson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Anderson_%28writer%29) said
hi and plugged his new startup with the inimitable [Adam
Goldstein](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adam_Goldstein_(author)),
[BookTour](http://booktour.com/). Adam — say hi sometime!

Theo Gray [demoes Mathematica 6](http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/).
[Ted Kaehler](http://weather-dimensions.com/tedkaehler/us/ted/), a
lieutenant of [Alan Kay](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Kay), demoes
the latest stuff from [Squeakland](http://squeakland.org/), which has
similar demos but for kids and with less elegance. ([Dean
Kamen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Kamen) got very interested;
presumably for [FIRST](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIRST).) [Bjørn
Lomborg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bj%C3%B8rn_Lomborg) takes his
[Copenhagen
Consensus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen_Consensus) show on
the road. Hugh Reinhoff tells how he diagnosed his daughter’s congenital
illness by sequencing her DNA to find the genetic mutation. (Harvard
charges only \$3.50 a reaction!) “All the stuff you need these days is
available on the Web,” he explains. “But the doctors get totally freaked
out.”

The Google buildings are almost mazelike.

[George
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Dyson_%28science_historian%29)
has a standing-room-only talk on “Gödel and the Draft Board”. (It was
already moved to a larger room once.) The rest of [the Dyson
family](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyson) and [Martin
Rees](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Rees), President of the Royal
Society, are among the numerous in attendance. George Dyson gives a
madcap tour of Gödel’s attempts to become a full professor at the
[Institute for Advanced
Study](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institute_for_Advanced_Study) — a
story of endless disappointments which Dyson manages to make quite
funny. It’s brilliant, if you can look past his standard bits of
softheadedness. [Freeman
Dyson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_Dyson) pipes in with stories
from his [Neal Stephenson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neal_Stephenson)
notes that Gödel went on to work on lonely philosophical projects and
George suggests that the open-ended freedom of the Institute was a bit
of a mistake. [Tim
O’Reilly](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_O%27Reilly) wonders if this
is a more general lesson. “I once paid [Larry
Wall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larry_Wall) a salary to do …
basically whatever he wanted for a year,” he said. “I worry that it was
the worst thing that ever happened to the Perl community, because that
was when [Perl 6](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perl_6) turned into what
someone called a performance art project.”

Martha Stewart fills a big room speaking on the Paperless Home. “I may
not look like it,” she says, “but I’m the typical homemaker. I have a
dog, I have a daughter, I have a garden, I have a farm, and I do—or I
did it all myself.” And as a homemaker, she’s convinced homes need to
become computerized. Not too computerized, of course — not like those
crazy folks at MIT who want to have refrigerators that talk and coffee
makers that do the same thing every day. Stewart wants to preserve
traditions too. So she’s going to build tools to organize the
ultra-tedious tasks of life. She’s very bright, hard-headed, and
engaging. “So exhausting,” says one woman upon the session’s conclusion.
“We pay people to do that sort of work.”

[Dalton Conley](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dalton_Conley), the
persecuted sociologist, and his arthack wife [Natalie
Jeremijenko](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natalie_Jeremijenko) gab at
dinner. Dean Kamen gesticulates wildly and talks about watching
beautiful women who bend down to pick things up. Nat Torkington
discusses how O’Reilly refused to censor [his video demonstration of New
Zealand
culture](http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2005/07/why_imovie_shou.html).
[Chris DiBona](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_DiBona) admits he just
works at Google (as a grown-up!) so that he can do science tourism. Theo
Gray shows me the 3D Table of the Elements he printed out using a
lenticular.

The Internet here is really wonky.

[Timo Hannay](http://www.connotea.org/wiki/User:timo) of *Nature*
introduces himself and welcomes me, giving some clues as to why I was
invited. He asks me to explain [Science that
Matters](http://sciencethatmatters.com/), which is an odd situation. My
proud co-author [Jim
Hendler](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Hendler) gives a talk on the
future of science publishing. [Paul
Ginsparg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Ginsparg) ducks out to look
at [Howtoons](http://www.howtoons.com/), where [Saul
Griffith](http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~saul/), who is dating Tim’s
daughter [Arwen
O’Reilly](http://www.makezine.com/pub/au/Arwen_O_Reilly), explains that
they try to combine emotional stories to attract girls and action at a
distance (guns, explodey-things, etc.) to attract boys, and telling the
real stories behind discoveries to attract all. Theo Gray talks about
the liability issues involved in publishing [his Popular Science
column](http://www.theodoregray.com/PeriodicTable/PopularScience/index.html).
They made sure to get [Judith
Regan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judith_Regan) as their publisher so
that they could print all sorts of dangerous stuff in their book, only
to have her sacked because of the [O.J. Simpson
debacle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/If_I_Did_It). The conversation
then devolved into explodey-things you can make at home. But [the
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/006076158X) should be out soon. It
looks great.

The WiFi at the conference hotel [adds ads to
pages](http://vancouver.cs.washington.edu/). Wow, is that annoying.

### Sunday

[Eric Bonabeau](http://www.icosystem.com/about_management.htm)
apologized for being rude to me the other day and explained what his
company does — predict human behavior based on modeling cognitive
biases. “Clearly people aren’t rational economic actors,” he explained.
“Just look at [Quinn
Norton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quinn_Norton).”

Someone whose name I didn’t catch talks about finding which genetic
differences increase your risk for getting a particular disease. To get
1x coverage of your genome from [Celera](http://www.celera.com/) costs
only \$100,000 and [23andMe](http://www.23andme.com/) hopes to do
portions of your gene for \$1,000. And just doing portions costs tens of
dollars. You can [browse the genome](http://jimwatsonsequence.cshl.edu/)
of [Jim Watson](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_D._Watson) and find
the genetic mutations unique to him. “Perhaps that mutation explains the
*extreme* sexism,” jokes [Paul
Ginsparg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Ginsparg). He shows [a large
study of genetic risk
factsors](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v447/n7145/full/nature05911.html)
and examines Watson to see if he’s at risk.

[I](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz) give my talk. When I
start, about 4 people are there, but I charge ahead and 15 or so more
people show up. I give a demo of [Open
Library](http://demo.openlibrary.org/), which most people miss because
they came late. Then we discuss how to open the scientific literature.
Ginsparg says that studies have found that about a third of all papers,
preferentially high-impact papers, are available for free online. We
learn about the ways people keep online bibliographies (including the
Drupal modules involved). And someone else suggests that the [Wellcome
Trust](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wellcome_Trust) just buy Elsevier
and open it up.

[Natalie](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natalie_Jeremijenko) helps
[Dalton](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dalton_Conley) set up his computer
for their joint session, in which they make “somewhat opposite
arguments”. (They look much less cool when they’re wearing casual
clothing.) He covers the problems in studying [his book on birth
order](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0375713816). He shows that blacks who
were called for the draft are less likely to die in later years (“which
I was shocked about”), which he proposes is because the military is the
most color-blind institution (he suggests the black-white test score gap
is smaller there too). He notes that women’s groups prefer the voting
records of politicians with daughters (for a potential natural
experiment). Roommate lottery finds that each point loss in GPA costs
you .25 points and that roommate drinking is a major influence. But once
the effects are known, people adjust their social behavior. Thus social
scientists are on a treadmill. [Carl
Bergstrom](http://octavia.zoology.washington.edu/) says he sees similar
patterns in evolution — even if the animals are at a draw, you can see
if the genome is under heavy selection.

Natalie talks about her [Urban Space Station
project](http://www.nyu.edu/projects/xdesign/uss/) which uses closed
systems engineering to create safe urban spaces. Attached she’ll have a
lab, one project of which is the Environmental Health Clinic, where
people come with environmental problems and get prescriptions for things
to do to help improve their world. One prescription: [the
greenlight](http://www.nyu.edu/projects/xdesign/greenlight/).

I wanted to get into a fight with Dalton about the metareliability of
these natural experiments but couldn’t find him — he and Natalie were
too busy taking care of two adorable children. At lunch I explained Open
Library to some folks from *Nature*, then got involved in a discussion
making fun of Stephen Wolfram with Chris DiBona and others. I learned
the meaning of my Google New York shirt. Jim McBride told me how much he
liked STM (which I saw on some other peoples’ feed readers) and invited
me up to their abandoned air traffic control tower. Paul Ginsparg
introduced me to [Michael Kurtz](http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/~kurtz/) of
[ADS](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/).

Tim gives the closing speech: he wants to hear what new connections were
made, that’s his metric for success. Afterwards, I get in a great
conversation with Carl Bergstrom who tells me about new features on his
[Eigenfactor](http://eigenfactor.org/) site. Then I bump into [Bjørn
Lomborg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bj%C3%B8rn_Lomborg), who is amazed
I know about the Copenhagen Consensus. He’s been giving copies of his
new book to everyone within throwing distance and stops to amicably
persuade me that we should spend less on stopping global warming.
Incredibly friendly guy — imagine the lead of *Thank You For Smoking*
but a surfer. I talked to a lot of other people but I don’t remember the
details.

The Google people are packing up the camping tents and mats. [Tamara
Munzner](http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~tmm/) demoes some of her visualization
software. She gave me and others a ride. [Ezez
Lieberman](http://www.erez.com/) told me about his work modeling
versions of evolution in which strucural forces cause random drift to
tie with fitness selection and his wife Aviva Presser told me about her
work investigating methilation in gene sequences.

It was an incredible conference. Probably the best I’ve been to
(although that’s not saying much).

### More…

View [photos on Flickr](http://flickr.com/search/?q=scifoo&s=rec).

Also, be sure to check out [my comments on the Foo Camp format and
suggestions for improving it](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/foofix).
