What’s Freedom?
===============

June 23, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/whosefreedom)

* * * * *

George Lakoff is a prominent cognitive scientist whose central insight
(which is not to say that the idea originates with him) is that we can
learn about the structure of our thoughts by looking carefully at the
words we use to express them. For example, we think of time as a line,
as you can see through phrases like “time line”, “looking forward”,
“further in the past”, etc. Similarly, we thinking is thought of as a
kind of seeing: “do you see what I mean?”, “pulled the wool over your
eyes”, “as you can see from the book”, “his talk was unclear”, “that
sentence is opaque”, etc.

Lakoff used these techniques to write a series of books describing the
structures of various ideas (*Metaphors We Live By*, *Philosophy in the
Flesh*, *Where Mathematics Comes From*, etc.) but after the Republican
Revolution of 1994, he turned the technique on politics, resulting in
his 1996 classic *Moral Politics*, which tries to explicate the
cognitive models of Democrats and Republicans.

After the election of Bush~2~, Lakoff began talking about how
Republicans were better at “framing”, or using language to get people to
agree with them, than Democrats. Lakoff that the process goes both ways:
language causes your mind to think of certain concepts which create
certain pathways in your brain. Thus Republicans, he said, through
massive repetition of certain phrases, were literally changing the
brains of the electorate to be more favorable to them. (“If this sounds
a bit scary,” he writes, “it should. This is a scary time.”)

Around the 2004 election, Lakoff skyrocketed to fame among Democrats,
who were convinced by his argument that fighting Republicans required
not just giving into Republican frames, but reframing the debate
themselves. He rushed out the slender book *Don’t Think of an Elephant*,
a cobbled-together guide on his basic ideas and how progressives could
use them. The book stayed on the *New York Times* bestseller list for
weeks.

Now Lakoff is back with a more studied work, *Whose Freedom?*, which
tries to focus in more detail on the differing views of one particular
concept: freedom. Lakoff starts the book by noting that in his 2004
speech at the Republican convention, Bush used “freedom”, “free”, or
“liberty” once every forty-three words. Most progressives think of this
simply as a stunt — using feel-good symbols like flag and words like
freedom to distract from the real issues. But Lakoff argues something
much deeper is going on: Bush is trying to change the meaning of freedom
itself.

So what is he trying to change it to? Right away, the book begins to
fall apart. Lakoff’s definition of freedom is so broad (it encompasses
democracy, opportunity, equality, fairness, education, health, the
press, the market, religion, the military, academia, and privacy) as to
be fundamentally meaningless: “Every progressive issue is ultimately
about freedom,” he concludes. And yet freedom is kept on as the book’s
organizing principle: instead of chapters about economics, religion, and
foreign policy, we have the chapters “Economic Freedom”, “Religion and
Freedom”, and “Foreign Policy and Freedom”.

This would be harmless if it was simply a rhetorical affectation, but
Lakoff still seems to think is fundamentally about freedom. As a result,
the chapters are not only weighed down with meaningless and silly
attempts to connect the topic to freedom (“Life is a progressive issue,
since progressive Christians are committed to promoting freedom, freedom
from oppression and pain and freedom to realize one’s dreams.” — actual
quote) but their actual substance is stripped bare, because it’s not
discussed in its own right, but merely as an aid to the book’s
discussion of freedom.

Thus instead of deriving his key theory of how family metaphors create
political views, by showing how he discovered this and how it explains a
lot about the world, he quickly asserts it and then tries to apply the
idea to the empty void of “freedom”. The result is a book that is
fundamentally vacuous — its main idea has no substance and its
supporting ideas have no explanation.

And for a linguist, Lakoff has a surprisingly tin ear for language. His
suggestions (like using the term “freedom judges” to respond to
“activist judges”) are so bad that I assume they must not be meant to be
taken literally (“judges that will fight for freedom” is more akin to
what Lakoff means).

It’s unclear how the book got into this sorry state, but the good news
is there’s hope. Lakoff’s Rockridge Institute has been putting out
thoughtful and valuable guides on how to think and talk about various
issues and they plan to publish their major work, the Progressive
Manual, this summer. Let us hope that book does what this could not.

*Disclosure:* I received a free review copy of Lakoff’s book fedexed to
me before the July 4 publication date.
