Making More Wikipedias
======================

September 14, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedias)

* * * * *

**Wikimedia 2006 Elections**

Part 1: [Wikimedia at the
Crossroads](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikiroads)\
 Part 2: [Who Writes
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whowriteswikipedia)\
 Part 3: [Who Runs
Wikipedia?](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/whorunswikipedia)\
 Part 4: [Making More
Wikipedians](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/morewikipedians)\
 Part 5: **Making More Wikipedias**\
 Part 6: [Code, and Other
Laws](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/wikicodeislaw)\

If you translate this essay, please [contact me](mailto:me@aaronsw.com).

**[Vote for me](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:AaronSw/Election)** in
the election for the Wikimedia Foundation’s Board of Directors.

Maybe it’s just me, but it seems like everywhere you look people are
trying to get a piece of Wikipedia. Wikis sites have been started in
every field from [the Muppets](http://muppet.wikia.com/wiki/Muppet_Wiki)
to [the law](http://lii.law.cornell.edu/wex/index.php/Main_Page). The
domain Wiki.com recently was [sold for 3 million
dollars](http://www.wired.com/news/technology/internet/0,71591-0.html?tw=wn_technology_1).
Professor Cass Sunstein, [previously
seen](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0691095892) arguing the Internet could
tear apart the republic, just published [a new
book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0195189280) arguing tools like wikis
will lead us to “Infotopia”. So is it possible to replicate Wikipedia’s
success? What’s the key that made it work?

Unfortunately, this question hasn’t gotten the attention it deserves.
For the most part, people have simply assumed that Wikipedia is as
simple as the name suggests: install some wiki software, say that it’s
for writing an encyclopedia, and *voila!* — problem solved. But as
pretty much everyone who has tried has discovered, it isn’t as simple as
that.

Technology industry people tend to reduce web sites down to their
technology: [Wikipedia](http://wikipedia.org/) is simply an instance of
wiki software, [DailyKos](http://www.dailykos.com/) just blog software,
and [Reddit](http://reddit.com/) just voting software. But these sites
aren’t just installations of software, there also communities of people.

Building a community is pretty tough; it requires just the right
combination of technology and rules and people. And while it’s been
clear that communities are at the core of many of the most interesting
things on the Internet, we’re still at the very early stages of
understanding what it is that makes them work.

But Wikipedia isn’t even a typical community. Usually Internet
communities are groups of people who come together to discuss something,
like cryptography or the writing of a technical specification. Perhaps
they meet in an IRC channel, a web forum, a newsgroup, or on a mailing
list, but the focus is always something “out there”, something outside
the discussion itself.

But with Wikipedia, the goal is building Wikipedia. It’s not a community
set up to make some other thing, it’s a community set up to make itself.
And since Wikipedia was one of the first sites to do it, we know hardly
anything about building communities like that.

Indeed, we know hardly anything about building software for that. Wiki
software has been around for years — the first wiki was launched in
1995; Wikipedia wasn’t started until 2001 — but it was always used like
any other community, for discussing something else. It wasn’t generally
used for building wikis in themselves; indeed, it wasn’t very good at
doing that.

Wikipedia’s real innovation was much more than simply starting a
community to build an encyclopedia or using wiki software to do it.
Wikipedia’s real innovation was the idea of radical collaboration.
Instead of having a small group of people work together, it invited the
entire world to take part. Instead of assigning tasks, it let anyone
work on whatever they wanted, whenever they felt like it. Instead of
having someone be in charge, it let people sort things out for
themselves. And yet it did all this towards creating a very specific
product.

Even now, it’s hard to think of anything else quite like it. Books have
been co-authored, but usually only by two people. Large groups have
written encyclopedias, but usually only by being assigned tasks.
Software has been written by communities, but typically someone is in
charge.

But if we take this definition, rather than wiki software, as the core
of Wikipedia, then we see that other types of software are also forms of
radical collaboration. Reddit, for example, is radical collaboration to
build a news site: anyone can add or edit, nobody is in charge, and yet
an interesting news site results. Freed from the notion that Wikipedia
is simply about wiki software, one can even imagine new kinds of sites.
What about a “debate wiki”, where people argue about a question, but the
outcome is a carefully-constructed discussion for others to read later,
rather than a morass of bickering messages.

If we take radical collaboration as our core, then it becomes clear that
extending Wikipedia’s success doesn’t simply mean installing more copies
of wiki software for different tasks. It means figuring out the key
principles that make radical collaboration work. What kinds of projects
is it good for? How do you get them started? How do you keep them
growing? What rules do you put in place? What software do you use?

These questions can’t be answered from the armchair, of course. They
require experimentation and study. And that, in turn, requires building
a community around strong collaboration itself. It doesn’t help us much
if each person goes off and tries to start a wiki on their own. To learn
what works and what doesn’t, we need to share our experiences and be
willing to test new things — new goals, new social structures, new
software.
