Philosophical Puzzles Resolved
==============================

March 8, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/unpuzzled)

* * * * *

Puzzle 1: Equality and Disability
---------------------------------

Daniel Wikler posed to me the following problem he encountered while
Staff Ethicist at the WHO.^[1](#fn:fn1)^ The WHO recommends two
principles: first, treat all citizens equally; second, aim to maximize
overall quality of life. But imagine two citizens will die without a
kidney transplant, one of whom is seriously disabled, but there is only
one kidney. The first principle requires that both have an equal chance
of getting the kidney. But the second principle requires we give it to
the non-disabled person: if the disabled person dies, overall quality of
life in the society will be higher, since it will have one less disabled
person. (We accept, by definition, that disability lowers quality of
life.) What to do?

*Response:* It seems pretty clear that the first value is simply wrong.
We have no interest in promoting the health of the population; the
population is simply an abstraction. Our interest is in promoting the
health of (the sum of) individual people, who are conscious and
therefore have moral interests.

One can see this clearly by looking at the cases where the population
changes but people do not: birth, death, exile, and immigration:

**Birth:** The society has a controlled population growth program and
assigns birth permits; birth permits are assigned to parents with the
healthiest genes.

**Death:** The society has a limited number of organs; organs are given
to the least-injured.

**Exile:** Sick people are tossed out of the society.

**Immigration:** Only healthy people are allowed to immigrate.

In all four such cases, it seems pretty clear to me that the population
health position is wrong. (Exile seems particularly cruel.)

Puzzle 2: The Repugnant Conclusion
----------------------------------

Derek Parfit [poses](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mere_addition_paradox)
the following problem. 1: Imagine there are a group of happy people (A).
2: Now imagine that some other people are created in some other
completely unconnected place that are happy, but less happy than the
previous group (B). 3: Now imagine that both groups are adjusted to be
at some equal, but intermediate point of happiness between A and A+. 4:
Now imagine these two societies are connected, resulting in C: more
people at a lesser degree of happiness.

2 is no worse than 1, since the additional people are happy and do not
affect anyone. 3 is no worse than 2, since the people in B are made
happier by more than the people in A are made unhappy. 4 is no worse
than 3, since we are simply introducing folks to each other. But
continue this and you reach the repugnant conclusion: a huge swarm of
people who are just barely happy is better than a handful of people who
are extremely happy.

*Response:* The problem is step 2, which is in fact worse than 1. Parfit
assumes that simply adding extra people whose lives are worth living
cannot make things worse. But that’s ridiculous. Imagine our society,
then imagine our society with a bunch more feral people living on the
huge island of garbage in the middle of the Pacific, unable to speak
except in a growl, with none of the surrounding societies ever noticing.
I think the people living in the garbage heap’s lives would be worth
living (I wouldn’t want to kill them, nor would they want to be killed),
but I distinctly prefer the former society.

Puzzle 3: The Logic of the Larder
---------------------------------

Many people say that we shouldn’t eat animals, because that would mean
killing them. But for many of these animals, if they aren’t going to be
killed and eaten, they would never be born in the first place. What if
the animal preferred to have a short, pleasant existence before being
consumed as food rather than having no existence at all? Wouldn’t that
mean we should breed the animal, give it a nice life, then kill and eat
it?

*Response:* This is a ridiculous hypothetical — you’re suggesting an
animal that doesn’t exist yet has a preference about existing. I don’t
respect hypothetical creatures’ hypothetical desires to not be
hypothetical. If I did, you could get me to do all sorts of absurd
things just by hypothesizing them. You could, say, simply hypothesize a
utility monster’s very strong desire to exist and I would be morally
bound to try to create one. Or perhaps my hypothetical children really
want to exist, so I have to hurry to procreate. That’s ridiculous.

I think we should maximize the actual interests of actual people.

Puzzle 4: Addition vs. Subtraction
----------------------------------

As a consequentialist, if I support not adding people (as I do in my
resolution to 2 and 3), then I must support removing people, since the
consequences are identical. If I prefer a society with fewer, happier
people, then I must support euthanizing some people to make the rest
better off. Sure, there are practical questions with implementing this,
but philosophically, I must be in favor of eliminationism.

*Response:* I am not a consequentialist about societies, I’m a
utilitarian: I think we should work toward outcomes that maximize the
interests of individuals.

There’s a fundamental disanalogy between addition and contraction.
Addition means creating new people with interests that didn’t exist
before the addition. Contraction, on the other hand, means getting rid
of actually-existing people. I do not respect the hypothetical interests
of hypothetical individuals to not be hypothetical, but I do respect
real people with real interests right now, who presumably have an
interest in not being gotten rid of. Thus, I support not getting rid of
people and not arbitrarily creating new ones.

* * * * *

1.  The problem is also discussed in F.M. Kamm, “[Disability,
    Discrimination, and Irrelevant
    Goods](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=8494272529527506736)“ [↩](#fnref:fn1)


