San Francisco: Silicon Valley’s Ghetto
======================================

November 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/sfghetto)

* * * * *

Big American cities have a shameful history of setting up smaller ones
into which to punt the workers who make their city run. In *Amazing
Grace*, Jonathan Kozol writes heart-wrenchingly about life in East St.
Louis. And a little closer to home, in the shining Valley city of Palo
Alto, the workers and their families (as usual, mostly people of color)
are shunted into East Palo Alto at the end of the day.

Not only does this keep the workers and their families out of sight and
out of crime, but it has beneficial political effects too. The workers
may elect their own mayor, who is economically powerless to do anything
about their plight, and they may attend their own school system,
maintaining the new racial and economic segregation of American schools.
(Incidentally, Stanford recently purchased East Palo Alto High School so
it can run experiments on the poor children.)

It would be absurd and offensive to compare life in San Francisco to
life in these impoverished neighborhoods, but I can’t help but feel
there are some structural similarities. Whatever else San Francisco is,
it is a reaction to the Valley. Many of the people I’ve met here are
doing their best to escape their stifling Silicon Valley jobs, taking
the bus or train or car every day into work, then running back as soon
as they can.

The result is that San Francisco ends up being something like the
opposite of the Valley. The Valley has its clean if gray office
buildings in neat squares; San Francisco has its rough and random dirty
shops and houses drizzled across hillsides. The Valley is full of
conservative corporate behavior; San Francisco is full of left-wing
activists. The Valley is where people work, so San Francisco is where
they play, throwing frisbees in parks and hanging out in coffee shops or
going to dance parties at night. The Valley is a place of businesslike
behavior; in San Francisco people hug deeply when they meet. (Not
everyone, of course; none of this is everyone, but more than enough to
be noticeable.)

The result, like some Marxist dialectic, is that neither the City nor
the Valley really feel real. Both are reacting against each other,
playing off their faults, waiting for some synthesis to put the pieces
back together. The result is, to be sane you have to be in both.

City people refer to Palo Alto as Shallow Alto, which might even be
literally true. The city is a thin strip of road, surrounded on one side
by houses and on the other by offices, with Stanford behind it and other
cities in front. It is, perhaps, a decent place to work — the finest
upscale fakery you can find along relatively clean streets where even
the homeless are white — but it’s apparently a terribly boring place to
live.

Meanwhile the city is all action. People are “intellectually lazy” here,
complains one resident. You can zip around on bikes and scooters, drop
into parties and nightclubs, gab with friends, eat good food, stroll by
shops, do everything but actually get work done. People here are fleeing
from work, not looking for it.

And so, to live, you ping-pong back and forth. A job you hate in the
Valley, but you have to keep it so that it pays the exorbitant rent in
the City, which you have to live in to escape the deadliness of the
Valley. High highs, low lows, bright nights, dark days.

I suspect the City works as an escape valve in other ways. Instead of
unioninizing your big corporate employer, you simply flee to a False
Profit party, secure in your anti-capitalist sentiment. Instead of
working to build a better life, you go out dancing with your friends,
trying to enjoy the little time you have.

Which, I have to say, is better than most. Most office drones just go
home and watch TV, their work having drained from them the energy for
any more productive activity. I suspect some of the difference lies in
the peculiar economics of the computer industry. The people in it are
unusually smart and talented. And the barriers to entry are so low that
if they wanted to they could start their own thing (and, as the startup
world shows, many do). So perhaps one has to “heighten the distractions”
to keep them busy.

But who knows? I’ve got a party to get to.
