Judgment Day
============

December 10, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/judgmentday)

* * * * *

People don’t like being told that they’re bad. And they especially don’t
like it if it’s going to cost them a lot to be good. Finding other ways
out is preferable, even if it requires some violence to the truth. Today
we look at some ways people try to evade responsibility.

[Please read [the previous
post](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall) before continuing.]

A large number of people insist that “things aren’t proven” or “aid
doesn’t work”. In his 1996 book *Living High and Letting Die* Peter
Unger reports a study where he found that, including in administrative
expenses and other overhead, \$200 could feed a malnourished child
through the highest-risk childhood years. UNICEF [just recently released
a new
report](http://www.unicef.org/progressforchildren/2007n6/index_41403.htm)
finding that, for the first time, the number of children dying before 5
has fallen, thanks to their intervention. And Oxfam, to take just one
example, through its development projects in Cambodia [has helped over
35,000
people](http://www.oxfam.org/en/programs/development/easia/cambodia_development)
come to support themselves. [Doctors Without Borders
reports](http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/publications/ar/i2006/index.cfm)
that they treated 10 million people last year, treating 26,000 people
from cholera, for example, and treating 63,000 children for
malnutrition. Even the most vocal critics of aid, like William Easterly,
who has written many books and op-eds attacking government aid programs
as unhelpful, has to concede that private projects like Oxfam and UNICEF
are successful and positive. Nobody, of course, provides any real
argument against these things. They just say it’s “too unclear”.

If that’s the real issue, then [donate to an organization like Poverty
Action Lab](http://www.povertyactionlab.org/) at MIT. PAL does
controlled randomized trials of the success of aid interventions. Your
money won’t go directly to help people, but it will help to test other
people’s aid interventions and improve their effectiveness. [A recent
report](http://www.povertyactionlab.com/papers/J-PAL_briefcase04_web_01a.pdf)
[PDF] finds that mass deworming programs dropped infections by 23 points
and increased school participation by 25% (thanks, in part, to spillover
effects), apparently caused children to grow taller and healthier, and
cost only \$5 for each disability-adjusted year of life saved.

[Barry Kelly insists](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c1)
that he has no duty to help others and thus is not culpable for their
suffering. Of course, this is an irrelevance. Nobody is trying to put
him on trial — just arguing he should do more to help.

But Barry goes one step further: he says that he should not help because
giving his money to starving people would lead to “lack of incentive to
compete, lack of investment base for risky & experimental ventures, and
congealing layers of bureaucracy feeding on income redistribution.”
Taking this at face value for a moment, it is not clear to me why why
saving people from starvation would cause the first two — wouldn’t there
be a huge incentive to compete for saving lives and trying new
experimental techniques in doing so? Perhaps Barry means that the
first-world might have less competition in a field like, say, luxury
watches. I don’t see this as a tragedy. It amazes me that someone would
admit that they prefer to have millions of people starve to death than
to have a complicated bureaucracy.

In response, [Barry
explains](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c7) that “there
needs to be a cost-benefit analysis”. He does not explain what he wants
to analyze. Should we make a little chart with the benefits of
competition in the luxury watch market on one side and the benefits of
saving people from starvation on the other?

He also argues that we should do nothing about starvation because many
people die in car accidents. I am not sure how this is relevant, but I
deplore the deaths of people in car accidents and personally do not
drive because of it.

[Sohail provides](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c11) the
amazing argument that one shouldn’t donate to UNICEF because “They have
a business model that revolves around needy people. To keep the model
going, you need needy people.” It is not clear how this principle is
supposed to work. Are the people at UNICEF supposed to be quietly
sabotaging their efforts in order to preserve their jobs? Since
non-profit employees generally take large salary cuts and do
unusually-onerous work, this seems wildly unlikely. If they wanted a
safe job they would surely join the for-profit sector. Sohail provides
no evidence for this amazing claim.

[MC argues](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c12) that
people will starve since he no longer purchases their products. But
certainly fewer people will starve if he spends his money directly on
keeping people from starving as opposed to having people not starve
incidentally because he is purchasing TVs from them. Is he claiming that
the people not starving right now somehow have a special right not to
starve? It’s hard to see why that would be the case.

[That Hypothetical
says](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c17) that
“Development economics is a complex subject.” I’m not sure how this is
relevant. Perhaps in the ancient society the King has a lot of scholars
working for him making the issue of how to decide which person to choose
into some complex subject. That doesn’t change the moral issues.

[Mike Bruce says](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/handwritingwall#c22)
that if we all spent our disposable income on helping starving people,
we might face economic collapse. This seems absurd but also certainly
isn’t a question anyone is facing. Even if all the readers of this blog
spent all their disposable income on preventing starvation, that would
be inconsequential in economic terms.

There are actual arguments against the issues raised in the last post.
These are not them.
