When Is Transparency Useful?
============================

February 11, 2010

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/usefultransparency)

* * * * *

*The following essay appears in the new O’Reilly book* [Open
Government](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0596804350) *and attempts to
combine and clarify some of the points I made in previous essays. It was
written in June 2009.*

*Transparency* is a slippery word; the kind of word that, like *reform*,
sounds good and so ends up getting attached to any random political
thing that someone wants to promote. But just as it’s silly to talk
about whether “reform” is useful (it depends on the reform), talking
about transparency in general won’t get us very far. Everything from
holding public hearings to requiring police to videotape interrogations
can be called “transparency”—there’s not much that’s useful to say about
such a large category.

In general, you should be skeptical whenever someone tries to sell you
on something like “reform” or “transparency.” In general, you should be
skeptical. But in particular, reactionary political movements have long
had a history of cloaking themselves in nice words. Take the Good
Government (goo-goo) movement early in the twentieth century. Funded by
prominent major foundations, it claimed that it was going to clean up
the corruption and political machines that were hindering city
democracy. Instead, the reforms ended up choking democracy itself, a
response to the left-wing candidates who were starting to get elected.

The goo-goo reformers moved elections to off-years. They claimed this
was to keep city politics distinct from national politics, but the real
effect was just to reduce turnout. They stopped paying politicians a
salary. This was supposed to reduce corruption, but it just made sure
that only the wealthy could run for office. They made the elections
nonpartisan. Supposedly this was because city elections were about local
issues, not national politics, but the effect was to increase the power
of name recognition and make it harder for voters to tell which
candidate was on their side. And they replaced mayors with unelected
city managers, so winning elections was no longer enough to effect
change.^[1](#fn:*)^

Of course, the modern transparency movement is very different from the
Good Government movement of old. But the story illustrates that we
should be wary of kind nonprofits promising to help. I want to focus on
one particular strain of transparency thinking and show how it can go
awry. It starts with something that’s hard to disagree with.

Sharing Documents with the Public
---------------------------------

Modern society is made of bureaucracies and modern bureaucracies run on
paper: memos, reports, forms, filings. Sharing these internal documents
with the public seems obviously good, and indeed, much good has come out
of publishing these documents, whether it’s the [National Security
Archive](http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/), whose Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA) requests have revealed decades of government wrongdoing
around the globe, or the indefatigable [Carl Malamud and his
scanning](http://public.resource.org/), which has put terabytes of
useful government documents, from laws to movies, online for everyone to
access freely.

I suspect few people would put “publishing government documents on the
Web” high on their list of political priorities, but it’s a fairly cheap
project (just throw piles of stuff into scanners) and doesn’t seem to
have much downside. The biggest concern—privacy—seems mostly taken care
of. In the United States, FOIA and the Privacy Act (PA) provide fairly
clear guidelines for how to ensure disclosure while protecting people’s
privacy.

Perhaps even more useful than putting government documents online would
be providing access to corporate and nonprofit records. A lot of
political action takes place outside the formal government, and thus
outside the scope of the existing FOIA laws. But such things seem
totally off the radar of most transparency activists; instead, giant
corporations that receive billions of dollars from the government are
kept impenetrably secret.

Generating Databases for the Public
-----------------------------------

Many policy questions are a battle of competing interests—drivers don’t
want cars that roll over and kill them when they make a turn, but car
companies want to keep selling such cars. If you’re a member of
Congress, choosing between them is difficult. On the one hand are your
constituents, who vote for you. But on the other hand are big
corporations, which fund your reelection campaigns. You really can’t
afford to offend either one too badly.

So, there’s a tendency for Congress to try a compromise. That’s what
happened with, for example, the Transportation Recall Enhancement,
Accountability, and Documentation (TREAD) Act. Instead of requiring
safer cars, Congress simply required car companies to report how likely
their cars were to roll over. Transparency wins again!

Or, for a more famous example: after Watergate, people were upset about
politicians receiving millions of dollars from large corporations. But,
on the other hand, corporations seem to like paying off politicians. So
instead of banning the practice, Congress simply required that
politicians keep track of everyone who gives them money and file a
report on it for public inspection.

I find such practices ridiculous. When you create a regulatory agency,
you put together a group of people whose job is to solve some problem.
They’re given the power to investigate who’s breaking the law and the
authority to punish them. Transparency, on the other hand, simply shifts
the work from the government to the average citizen, who has neither the
time nor the ability to investigate these questions in any detail, let
alone do anything about it. It’s a farce: a way for Congress to look
like it has done something on some pressing issue without actually
endangering its corporate sponsors.

Interpreting Databases for the Public
-------------------------------------

Here’s where the technologists step in. “Something is too hard for
people?” they hear. “We know how to fix that.” So they download a copy
of the database and pretty it up for public consumption—generating
summary statistics, putting nice pictures around it, and giving it a
snazzy search feature and some visualizations. Now inquiring citizen can
find out who’s funding their politicians and how dangerous their cars
are just by going online.

The wonks love this. Still stinging from recent bouts of deregulation
and antigovernment zealotry, many are now skeptical about government.
“We can’t trust the regulators,” they say. “We need to be able to
investigate the data for ourselves.” Technology seems to provide the
perfect solution. Just put it all online—people can go through the data
while trusting no one.

There’s just one problem: if you can’t trust the regulators, what makes
you think you can trust the data?

The problem with generating databases isn’t that they’re too hard to
read; it’s the lack of investigation and enforcement power, and websites
do nothing to help with that. Since no one’s in charge of verifying
them, most of the things reported in transparency databases are simply
lies. Sometimes they’re blatant lies, like how some factories keep two
sets of books on workplace injuries: one accurate one, reporting every
injury, and one to show the government, reporting just 10% of
them.^[2](#fn:dagger)^ But they can easily be subtler: forms are
misfiled or filled with typos, or the malfeasance is changed in such a
way that it no longer appears on the form. Making these databases easier
to read results only in easier-to-read lies.

Three examples:

-   Congress’s operations are supposedly open to the public, but if you
    visit the House floor (or if you follow what they’re up to on one of
    these transparency sites) you find that they appear to spend all
    their time naming post offices. All the real work is passed using
    emergency provisions and is tucked into subsections of innocuous
    bills. (The bank bailouts were put in the Paul Wellstone Mental
    Health Act.) Matt Taibbi’s [*The Great
    Derangement*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/038552062X) tells the
    story.

-   Many of these sites tell you who your elected official is, but what
    impact does your elected official really have? For 40 years, people
    in New York thought they were governed by their elected
    officials—their city council, their mayor, their governor. But as
    Robert Caro revealed in [*The Power
    Broker*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0394720245), they were all
    wrong. Power in New York was controlled by one man, a man who had
    consistently lost every time he’d tried to run for office, a man
    nobody thought of as being in charge at all: Parks Commissioner
    Robert Moses.

-   Plenty of sites on the Internet will tell you who your
    representative receives money from, but disclosed contributions are
    just the tip of the iceberg. As Ken Silverstein points out in [his
    series of pieces for
    Harper’s](http://www.harpers.org/subjects/KenSilverstein) (some of
    which he covers in his book
    [*Turkmeniscam*](http://books.theinfo.org/go/140006743X)), being a
    member of Congress provides for endless ways to get perks and cash
    while hiding where it comes from.

Fans of transparency try to skirt around this. “OK,” they say, “but
surely *some* of the data will be accurate. And even if it isn’t, won’t
we learn something from how people lie?” Perhaps that’s true, although
it’s hard to think of any good examples. (In fact, it’s hard to think of
any good examples of transparency work accomplishing anything, except
perhaps for more transparency.) But everything has a cost.

Hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent funding transparency
projects around the globe. That money doesn’t come from the sky. The
question isn’t whether some transparency is better than none; it’s
whether transparency is really the best way to spend these resources,
whether they would have a bigger impact if spent someplace else.

I tend to think they would. All this money has been spent with the goal
of getting a straight answer, not of doing anything about it. Without
enforcement power, the most readable database in the world won’t
accomplish much—even if it’s perfectly accurate. So people go online and
see that all cars are dangerous and that all politicians are corrupt.
What are they supposed to do then?

Sure, perhaps they can make small changes—this politician gets slightly
less oil money than that one, so I’ll vote for her (on the other hand,
maybe she’s just a better liar and gets her oil money funneled through
PACs or foundations or lobbyists)—but unlike the government, they can’t
solve the bigger issue: a bunch of people reading a website can’t force
car companies to make a safe car. You’ve done nothing to solve the real
problem; you’ve only made it seem more hopeless: all politicians are
corrupt, all cars are dangerous. What can you do?

An Alternative
--------------

What’s ironic is that the Internet does provide something you can do. It
has made it vastly easier, easier than ever before, to form groups with
people and work together on common tasks. And it’s through people coming
together—not websites analyzing data—that real political progress can be
made.

So far we’ve seen baby steps—people copying what they see elsewhere and
trying to apply it to politics. Wikis seem to work well, so you build a
political wiki. Everyone loves social networks, so you build a political
social network. But these tools worked in their original setting because
they were trying to solve particular problems, not because they’re
magic. To make progress in politics, we need to think best about how to
solve its problems, not simply copy technologies that have worked in
other fields. Data analysis can be part of it, but it’s part of a bigger
picture. Imagine a team of people coming together to tackle some issue
they care about—food safety, say. You can have technologists poring
through safety records, investigative reporters making phone calls and
sneaking into buildings, lawyers subpoenaing documents and filing
lawsuits, political organizers building support for the project and
coordinating volunteers, members of Congress pushing for hearings on
your issues and passing laws to address the problems you uncover, and,
of course, bloggers and writers to tell your stories as they unfold.

Imagine it: an investigative strike team, taking on an issue, uncovering
the truth, and pushing for reform. They’d use technology, of course, but
also politics and the law. At best, a transparency law gets you one more
database you can look at. But a lawsuit (or congressional
investigation)? You get to subpoena all the databases, as well as the
source records behind them, then interview people under oath about what
it all means. You get to ask for what you need, instead of trying to
predict what you may someday want.

This is where data analysis can be really useful. Not in providing
definitive answers over the Web to random surfers, but in finding
anomalies and patterns and questions that can be seized upon and
investigated by others. Not in building finished products, but by
engaging in a process of discovery. But this can be done only when
members of this investigative strike team work in association with
others. They would do what it takes to accomplish their goals, not be
hamstrung by arbitrary divisions between “technology” and “journalism”
and “politics.”

Right now, technologists insist that they’re building neutral platforms
for anyone to find data on any issue. Journalists insist that they’re
objective observers of the facts. And political types assume they
already know the answers and don’t need to investigate further
questions. They’re each in their own silo, unable to see the bigger
picture.

I certainly was. I care passionately about these issues—I don’t want
politicians to be corrupt; I don’t want cars to kill people—and as a
technologist I’d love to be able to solve them. That’s why I got swept
up in the promise of transparency. It seemed like just by doing the
things I knew how to do best—write code, sift through databases—I could
change the world.

But it just doesn’t work. Putting databases online isn’t a silver
bullet, as nice as the word *transparency* may sound. But it was easy to
delude myself. All I had to do was keep putting things online and
someone somewhere would find a use for them. After all, that’s what
technologists do, right? The World Wide Web wasn’t designed for
publishing the news—it was designed as a neutral platform that could
support anything from scientific publications to pornography.

Politics doesn’t work like that. Perhaps at some point putting things on
the front page of the *New York Times* guaranteed that they would be
fixed, but that day is long past. The pipeline of leak to investigation
to revelation to report to reform has broken down. Technologists can’t
depend on journalists to use their stuff; journalists can’t depend on
political activists to fix the problems they uncover. Change doesn’t
come from thousands of people, all going their separate ways. Change
requires bringing people together to work on a common goal. That’s hard
for technologists to do by themselves.

But if they do take that as their goal, they can apply all their talent
and ingenuity to the problem. They can measure their success by the
number of lives that have been improved by the changes they fought for,
rather than the number of people who have visited their website. They
can learn which technologies actually make a difference and which ones
are merely indulgences. And they can iterate, improve, and scale.

Transparency can be a powerful thing, but not in isolation. So, let’s
stop passing the buck by saying our job is just to get the data out
there and it’s other people’s job to figure out how to use it. Let’s
decide that our job is to fight for good in the world. I’d love to see
all these amazing resources go to work on *that*.

*Thanks to Andy Oram and Andy Eggers for their insightful comments on
earlier versions of this essay.*

* * * * *

1.  For more, see
    [http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html](http://sociology.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/power/local.html). [↩](#fnref:*)

2.  *Fast Food Nation*, Eric Schlosser, Houghton Mifflin, 2001. [p.
    180] [↩](#fnref:dagger)


