What Kind of a Thing is Twitter?
================================

August 20, 2009

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/twitter)

* * * * *

Do you ever eavesdrop on random people? At the office, on the subway, in
a park — if you’re quiet, you can listen to people chat. If you do, you
quickly find that, for the most part, they have conversations that seem
perfectly boring. This is most obvious on IRC (Internet text chat)
where, since the conversations are entirely textual, they can be
perfectly transcribed. If you look at the transcripts later, you find
they’re often almost unreadable — even in channels dedicated to very
technical topics, you’ll find hours of conversation about someone’s dog.

Such conversation clearly does not perform an objective
information-sharing function — the relevant facts about the dog can be
laid out in a paragraph (if that). It serves a social function — a
function with a deep evolutionary history. Primates get to know each
other through grooming each other’s fur. But that’s time-consuming; as a
result, primates rarely form groups larger than 25. One of the big
breakthroughs for humans was moving from grooming to gossip. Instead of
25 people, the average human knows 150. And so we talk, and as we talk
we reveal our personalities to each other: the things we care about, the
way we think, the subjects we understand. We make friends through this
process of conversation and personality reveal, even though objectively
the conversation is about matters that seem trivial. When it comes to
our friends, we know a lot of trivia.

What Twitter^[1](#fn:1)^ does is automate this process. Instead of
telling your bit of gossip or joke or humdrum story or minor complaint
to each of your friends as you see them, you tell it once to Twitter,
and then all your friends can see it. And just like the transition from
grooming to gossip, Twitter allows for an explosion in the number of
people we know. Where, in the past, it was only practical to have these
kinds of close, chatty friendships with a handful of people (even using
a technology like IM), now — using the power of the Web to bridge time
and space — you can have them with hundreds.

But the relationships need not be symmetrical. One of the things that’s
clear about celebrities in the age of television is that they take
advantage of this innate social sense. (*Fahrenheit 451* is caustic on
this subject.) We see these people all the time, we listen to them, we
watch them — and we come to feel as if we *know* them. And so,
naturally, our innate social sense kicks in and we want to hear their
gossip — a need tabloids try their best to fill.

Twitter provides a more raw, unmediated access to celebrity gossip.
Instead of hearing about it second-hand from TV news, we hear about it
straight from them. Oprah, of course, has been a pioneer of this: with a
daily long-form television show, she’s been able to cultivate (and
monetize) a friendship with millions. But most celebrities don’t have
that kind of access to their “followers.” They do on Twitter.

The catch, of course, is that it’s all somewhat fake. What you see on
Oprah’s show isn’t the real Oprah; it’s a hyperreal Oprah, a
carefully-crafted simulation of a gregarious friend chatting with you in
your living room — makeup, lighting, sets, and script are all carefully
planned to seem “natural.” And most Twitter feeds are the same —
humorists spend days polishing the one-liner they seem to carelessly
toss off, politicians have speechwriters thinking up soundbites that
they can tweet.

But it’s not just fake, it’s empty. The reason such apparently boring
conversation is interesting is because the act of conversation itself
reveals your personality. We assume we know the people whose petty
complaints and daily routines we’ve heard so much about because,
traditionally, the only way to hear such things was to get to know them
well. But it’s impossible to really know someone through sanitized
soundbites. In 140 characters, there’s little room for the nuances of
personality such conversation typically reveals. So, like Oprah’s
audience, we all see the carefully-prepared facade people *want* to
present, and come away thinking that we know them better than we really
do.

With people we know in “real life,” this isn’t such a big deal. We
already know their personality; Twitter simply helps maintain our
relationship by keeping us up-to-date. And while, in doing so, it lets
us maintain vastly more relationships, I’m not sure this is a bad thing.
Many people are starved for human relationship — we spend most of our
lives at the office, or at home watching TV and playing video games.
Most Americans live in suburbs with no street life and even in cities
everyone’s wearing iPods and thus unable to stop and chat. If Twitter
can help bring us together in an increasingly isolated world, then all
the better (and, it seems, with some positive political consequences as
well).

But, for the people we don’t know, it has the effect of making them all
Oprah. In the same way her millions of fans trust her book ([and movie
and health and plastic surgery…](http://www.newsweek.com/id/200025))
recommendations unquestioningly, because they feel that they know her,
Twitter can make us trust other celebrities. If you feel like your
Senator is a personal friend (and how can you not, after hearing them
tell you about their struggle to lose weight and the guy they met at the
gym?), then how could you possibly vote against them?

This isn’t new, of course. It goes back as far as radio (possibly
further). Pappy O’Daniel did it in Texas in the 1940s. He got on the
radio every day at noon and just chatted, like an old friend — sang a
few songs, read a little of his poetry, but mostly he just talked with
quiet cheer. And people treated him like a friend: he asked them to buy
his flour (simply other companies’ flour repackaged with his picture on
it and resold at a higher price) and they bought it. He asked them to
vote for him and they elected him Governor of Texas in a landslide —
whereupon, not knowing anything about politics, he plunged the state
government into turmoil and disaster. But he kept up those daily
broadcasts — now conducted from the Governor’s mansion — and they kept
on reelecting him. He was their friend, after all.

Twitter probably isn’t going to make THE\_REAL\_SHAQ governor, but I
don’t think it’s crazy to worry about it having similar effects.
Luckily, it also provides the tools for undoing these relationships. For
the housewives stuck at home with the TV, Oprah is the only option. But
on Twitter, at the same time you sign up to hear from Oprah, you can
also follow — and cement your relationship with — more real friends. And
it’s a good thing too, because with all these fake friends running
around, we’re going to need all the real ones we can get.

* * * * *

1.  I’ll say Twitter because it’s become the accepted term, but
    obviously this applies to similar services like
    identi.ca. [↩](#fnref:1)


