The Disappearance of Thought
============================

January 28, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/postmankid)

* * * * *

[![book
cover](image1_postmankid)](http://images.amazon.com/images/P/0679751661.01._SCLZZZZZZZ_.jpg)

Neil Postman is generally considered a thoughtful liberal critic of
technology and its deleterious effect on our culture. My friends praise
his attacks on television and rethinking of education. But it’s hard for
me to take him seriously after reading his *The Disappearance of
Childhood*, in which he argues (p. 87) that television is bad because it
teaches children homosexuality is normal and praises the Moral Majority
as being the only group to realize this important truth. And true, he
admits it’s an exaggeration to say “such a situation necessarily and
categorically signifies cultural degeneration”, he does insist it
clearly “poses dangers”.

Postman’s argument is that childhood is the creation of the printing
press, which led to a culture in which learning to read was necessary to
become an adult, and thus children became a separate group. In the same
way, he argues, the emergence of television, which requires no special
training to view, is destroying the distinction between children and
adults and bringing us back to that pre-literate age.

Not once does Postman ever explain why this should be considered a bad
thing. Instead, his book simply assumes it’s obvious that we need to
pretend to keep kids from naughty words (even though they know them
anyway), that we need to make it hard for kids to learn about sex, that
we need to pretend for them that political leaders are infallible, etc.

One is almost tempted to believe the book is tounge-in-cheek, an
impression assisted by the preface to the second edition — the only
place where actual children are ever considered — which quotes letters
Postman has received from students who have read portions of the book
and disagree completely with his argument that childhood is
disappearing. They don’t, however, criticize childhood itself, so
Postman assumes they are in favor of it and praises them as “a force in
preserving childhood”, a sort of “moral majority”.

And this, in miniature, is the problem with the whole book. Postman
investigates the history of childhood and modern thought, finding it a
creation of the printing press, and thus a social and not a biological
entity. But instead of investigating whether the result was good or bad,
he simply ignores his own work and proceeds directly to assuming it must
be good. What we are witnessing here is not the disappearance of
childhood, but the disappearance of thought.

[image1_postmankid]: image1_postmankid.jpg