Medium Stupid
=============

December 19, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/mediumstupid)

* * * * *

In July 1, 2004, Paul Krugman gave a talk about the state of the
American economy. After the significant 2001 recession, the economy had
begun growing again, with increasing growth in America’s economic
output, or GDP. But, unlike the growth in the Clinton years, the extra
money being made in America wasn’t going to the average person. Instead,
as the economy grew, the wages for the average person stagnated or even
declined. All the extra money was going to the people at the very top.

In the press, President Bush’s supporters complained that the public
wasn’t more happy about the growing economy Bush had given them. After
all, he’d pulled the country out of a recession; normally that’s good
for a boost in the polls. Sadly, Americans were just too dumb to notice,
Bush’s supporters concluded. If only they paid more attention to the
news. But what these people “are really urging,” Krugman explained in
his talk, “is not that the public should be smart, but that the public
should be medium
stupid.”[†](http://www.americanprogress.org/kf/krugman-final.pdf)

If the public was really “stupid” (i.e. uneducated), it wouldn’t watch
the news at all. Instead, it would notice it was out of work,
poorly-paid, or otherwise having trouble making ends meet, and conclude
that the economy wasn’t doing very well. On the other hand, if the
public was really smart, it’d dig deep into the numbers to find that —
surprise, surprise! — for most people, the economy wasn’t doing as well
as the headline numbers about GDP growth would suggest. The only way for
the public to buy the Bush administration spin is to be medium stupid.

The medium stupid idea has much wider applicability. Most specifically,
it explains the general state that the mainstream media tries to
inculcate in the public. The uneducated American has a general idea that
invading other countries is probably a bad idea. The overeducated
American can point to dozens of examples of why this is going to be a
bad idea. But the “medium stupid” American, the kind that gullibly reads
the *New York Times* and watches the *CBS Evening News*, is convinced
that Iraq is full of weapons of mass destruction that could blow our
country to bits at any minute. A little education can be a dangerous
thing.

(Along these lines, at one point I was working on a documentary film
about the evening news that would demonstrate this point. The title,
*Medium Stupid*, would also be a convenient homage to *Medium Cool*.)

The same is true in school. As Christopher Hayes points out in his
genius article, [Is A Little Economics A Dangerous
Thing?](http://www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/2897/), the
uneducated American thinks raising the minimum wage is a pretty good
idea — after all, people deserve to be paid more than \$5 an hour. And
the overeducated American feels the same way; like the dozens of
Economics Prize winners who signed a petition to raise the minimum wage,
they’ve seen the studies showing that raising the minimum wage has only
a negligible effect on employment. But those who have only had Economics
101 buy the propaganda that government interference in the market will
only make things worse. And, [as Hayes
shows](http://www.inthesetimes.com/site/main/article/2897/), this leads
to bad decisions in many areas — the minimum wage being only one
prominent example.

The medium stupid idea has applicability in other areas of life. The
uncultured person who knows nothing about fashion doesn’t mind wandering
around in jeans and a t-shirt. And the overcultured person knows exactly
what to wear to be hip. But medium stupid ol’ me looks bad and feels bad
about it.

To work, propaganda, be it from the Bush administration or the fashion
industry, requires you to be medium stupid. Know too little and you
never hear the falsehoods. Know too much and you can spot it for a
fraud. Which side of the line do you want to be on?
