The Toolbox Does Not Shrink
===========================

May 11, 2008

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/toolbox)

* * * * *

[![Book cover](image1_toolbox)](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521777445)

For the past forty years, Jon Elster has attempted to explain things
ranging from the emotions to technological change. The result is dozens
of books (and even more papers) in three languages across four
universities. And throughout, his work has not just been exemplary
social science, but has always struggled with the question of what
social science *should be* — what kinds of explanations are legitimate,
which techniques should be used, and so on.

As he reaches his late sixties, it is understandable if he begins to
think of his legacy. That certainly would help explain his latest book,
*Explaining Social Behavior: More Nuts and Bolts for the Social
Sciences* (Cambridge University Press, 2007), a 500-page masterpiece
that I expect will be seen as the summation of a brilliant career.

It’s a book unlike any other and, as a result, unless read from start to
finish can seem bizarre, if only because one has little sense of what
the book is trying to do. It is not a guidebook, or a textbook, or a
piece of social science in itself. In short, it is nothing less than an
attempt to summarize an idealized vision of the whole of social science
in simple language.

The book’s foundational assumption (as implied by its title) is that the
goal of social science is to discover explanations for social phenomena.
It begins by describing what explanations are and discussing their
different forms. But the bulk of the book consists of tools that can be
used in explanations: emotions, norms, time discounting, weakness of
will, magical thinking, cognitive dissonance, heuristics and biases,
rationality, irrationality, neuroscience, evolution, externalities, game
theory, pluralistic ignorance, informational cascades, collective
action, cyclical preferences, institutions, etc. — in short, the entire
toolkit of the social sciences.

Just as amazing as the breadth topics is the way in which they’re
covered. Elster explains each phenomenon clearly and concisely, so that
any educated reader can understand them with little effort, without ever
sacrificing intellectual depth. His explanations are peppered with
examples from an amazing variety of sources: ancient history, recent
history, personal experience, the classics of social science (e.g.
Tocqueville), the great philosophers (Montaigne, Pascal, Mill), and
classic novelists (e.g. Proust). The result is a book which not just
introduces readers to the discoveries of the social sciences but to the
intellectual world as a whole. Bibliographical notes following each
chapter as well as the conclusion provide a rich guide for further
exploration.

And yet it’s not simply a compendium of interesting results in the
social sciences, but attempts to defend a particular conception of what
the social sciences should be. In the conclusion, Elster defends his
notion of social science as the attempt to discover particular
explanations for particular phenomena against the “soft obscurantism” of
the literary theorists and the “hard obscurantism” of the economists. As
part of this, he turns his back on the notion of rational-choice models
being an explanation in themselves, noting that their many assumptions
are in desperate need of empirical defense.

In response to an earlier draft of this review, Elster wrote “I’m glad
you appreciate the details in my book, but you’re missing the big
picture, which is that there isn’t any.” Instead of trying to build a
Grand Theory which explains all of social life, we should try to build
explanations of particular phenomena from the nuts and bolts we have
lying around. And “even if a dominant explanation of a given event or
episode is discarded and then resurrected, the building blocks or
mechanisms at work in the discarding and resurrection remain. The
repertory, or the size of the toolbox, does not shrink.”

For anyone who cares about social science, Elster has done an amazing
service in clearly describing the toolbox’s contents and defending its
importance.

-   [Buy the book](http://books.theinfo.org/go/0521777445)

*This is the first post of Elster week.*

[image1_toolbox]: image1_toolbox.jpg